THE  CANONS  OF  THE   318   HOLY  FATHERS  ASSEMBLED   IN 

THE   CITY   OF  NICE,  IN   BITHYNIA. 

CANON  I. 

If  any  one  in  sickness  has  been  subjected  by  physicians  to  a  surgical  operation,  or 
if  he  has  been  castrated  by  barbarians,  let  him  remain  among  the  clergy ;  but,  if  any 
one  in  sound  health  has  castrated  himself,  it  behoves  that  such  an  one,  if  [already]  en- 
rolled among  the  clergy,  should  cease  [from  his  ministry],  and  that  from  henceforth  no 
such  person  should  be  promoted.  But,  as  it  is  evident  that  this  is  said  of  those  who 
wilfully  do  the  thing  and  presume  to  castrate  themselves,  so  if  any  have  been  made 
eunuchs  by  barbarians,  or  by  their  masters,  and  should  otherwise  be  found  worthy, 
such  men  the  Canon  admits  to  the  clergy. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome1  of  Canon  I. 


Eunuchs  may  be  received  into  the  number  of 
the  clergy,  but  those  who  castrate  themselves  shall 
not  be  received. 

Balsamon. 
The  divine  Apostolic  Canons  xxi.,  xxii.,  xxiii., 
and  xxiv.,  have  taught  us  sufficiently  what 
ought  to  be  done  with  those  who  castrate 
themselves,  this  canon  provides  as  to  what  is 
to  be  done  to  these  as  well  as  to  those  who 
deliver  themselves  over  to  others  to  be  emas- 
culated by  them,  viz.,  that  they  are  not  to  be 
admitted  among  the  clergy  nor  advanced  to 
the  priesthood. 

Daniel  Butler. 

(Smith  &  Cheetham,  Diet.  Christ.  Ant.) 

The  feeling  that  one  devoted  to  the  sacred 
ministry  should  be  unmutilated  was  strong  in 
the  Ancient  Church.  .  .  .  This  canon  of 
Nice,  and  those  in  the  Apostolic  Canons  and  a 
later  one  in  the  Second  Council  of  Aries  (canon 
vii.)  were  aimed  against  that  perverted  notion 
of  piety,  originating  in  the  misinterpretation 
of  our  Lord's  saying  (Matt.  xix.  12)  by  which 
Origen,  among  others,  was  misled,  and  their 
observance  was  so  carefully  enforced  in  later 
times  that  not  more  than  one  or  two  instances 
of  the  practice  which  they  condemn  are 
noticed  by  the  historian.  The  case  was  dif- 
ferent if  a  man  was  born  an  eunuch  or  had 
suffered  mutilation  at  the  hands  of  persecut- 
ors ;  an  instance  of  the  former,  Dorotheus, 
presbyter  of  Antioch,  is  mentioned  by  Euse- 
bius  ('//.  E.  vii.,  c.  32);  of  the  latter,  Tigris, 
presbyter  of  Constantinople,  is  referred  to 
both  by  Socrates  (H.  E.  vi.  15)  and  Sozomen 
(//.  E.  vi.  2-4)  as  the  victim  of  a  barbarian 
master. 

1  For  the  authority  of  this  epitome  vide  Introduction. 


Hefele. 


We  know,  by  the  first  apology  of  St.  Justin 
(Apol.  c.  29)  that  a  century  before  Origen,  a 
young  man  had  desired  to  be  mutilated  by 
physicians,  for  the  purpose  of  completely  re- 
futing the  charge  of  vice  which  the  heathen 
brought  against  the  worship  of  Christians.  St. 
Justin  neither  praises  nor  blames  this  young 
man  :  he  only  relates  that  he  could  not  obtain 
the  permission  of  the  civil  authorities  for  his 
project,  that  he  renounced  his  intention,  but 
nevertheless  remained  virgo  all  his  life.  It  is 
very  probable  that  the  Council  of  Nice  was  in- 
duced by  some  fresh  similar  cases  to  renew  the 
old  injunctions  ;  it  was  perhaps  the  Arian  bish- 
op, Leontius,  who  was  the  principal  cause  of  it.; 

Lambert. 
Constantine  forbade  by  a  law  the  practice 
condemned  in  this  canon.  "  If  anyone  shall 
anywhere  in  the  Roman  Empire  after  this  de- 
cree make  eunuchs,  he  shall  be  punished  with 
death.  If  the  owner  of  the  place  where  the 
deed  was  perpetrated  was  aware  of  it  and  hid 
the  fact,  his  goods  shall  be  confiscated." 
(Const.  M.  Opera.  Migne  Patrol,  vol.  viii.,  396.) 

Beveridge. 
The  Nicene  fathers  in  this  canon  make  no 
new  enactment  but  only  confirm  by  the  au- 
thority of  an  Ecumenical  synod  the  Apostolic 
Canons,  and  this  is  evident  from  the  wording 
of  this  canon.  For  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  they  had  in  mind  some  earlier  canon 
when  they  said,  "  such  men  the  canon  admits 
to  the  clergy."  Not,  owos  6  kuvo»',  but  o  Kavtbv, 
as  if  they  had  said  "  the  formerly  set  forth 

1  Lcontiu*  while  still  a  presbyter  lived  with  a  mbintroducta  at 
Antioch,  whose  name  wa»  Eustolion,  so  we  learn  from  St.  Atha- 
nasius,  Theodoret  {II.  K.  ii.  24)  and  Socrates  (//.  E.  ii  20;  as 
he  could  not  part  from  her  and  wished  to  prevent  her  leaving 
him.  he  mutilated  himself.  His  bishop  deposed  him  for  this  act. 
hut  the  Emperor  Constantine  (nol  Constantino,  us  by  a  mistake  in 
the  BngliSQ  Hefele.  1  p.  377)  practically  forced  him  into  the 
episcopal  throne  of  Antioch. 


I.  NICE.    A.D.  325 


and  well-known  canon  "  admits  such  to  the  I      This  law  was  frequently  enacted  by  sub 
clergy.     But  no  other  canon   then  existed  in  i  sequent  synods  and  is  inserted  in  the  Cor 


which  this  provision  occurred  except  apostoli- 
cal canon  xxi.  which  therefore  we  are  of  opin- 
ion is  here  cited. 

[In  this  conclusion  Hefele  also  agrees.] 


pus  Juris   Canonici,  Decretum  Gratiani.  Pars. 
I.     Distinctio  LV.,  C  vij. 


EXCURSUS   ON  THE  USE  OF  THE  WORD   "CANON." 

(Bright :  Notes  on  the  Canons,  pp.  2  and  3.) 

Kmw,  as  an  ecclesiastical  term,  has  a  very  interesting  history.  See  Westcott's  account 
of  it,  On  the  Neio  Testament  Canon,  p.  498  ff.  The  original  sense,  "  a  straight  rod  "  or 
"  line,"  determines  all  its  religious  applications,  which  begin  with  St.  Paul's  use  of  it  for 
a  prescribed  sphere  of  apostolic  work  (2  Cor.  x.  13,  15),  or  a  regulative  principle  of  Chris- 
tian life  (Gal.  vi.  16).  It  represents  the  element  of  definiteness  in  Christianity  and  in  the 
order  of  the  Christian  Church.  Clement  of  Rome  uses  it  for  the  measure  of  Christian 
attainment  (Ep.  Cor.  7).  Irenseus  calls  the  baptismal  creed  "  the  canon  of  truth  "  (i.  9,  4) : 
Polycrates  (Euseb.  v.  24)  and  probably  Hippolytus  (ib.  v.  28)  calls  it  "  the  canon  of  faith  ;  " 
the  Council  of  Antioch  in  a.d.  269,  referring  to  the  same  standard  of  orthodox  belief,  speaks 
with  significant  absoluteness  of  "the  canon"  (ib.  vii.  30).  Eusebius  himself  mentions 
"  the  canon  of  truth  "  in  iv.  23,  and  "  the  canon  of  the  preaching "  in  iii.  32  ;  and  so  Basil 
speaks  of  "  the  transmitted  canon  of  true  religion  "  (Epist.  204-6).  Such  language,  like  Ter- 
tullian's  "regula  fidei,"  amounted  to  saying,  "We  Christians  know  what  we  believe  :  it  is  not 
a  vague  '  idea '  without  substance  or  outline  :  it  can  be  put  into  form,  and  by  it  we  '  test  the 
spirits  whether  they  be  of  God.' "  Thus  it  was  natural  for  Socrates  to  call  the  Nicene  Creed 
itself  a  "  canon,"  ii.  27.  Clement  of  Alexandria  uses  the  phrase  "  canon  of  truth  "  for  a  stand- 
ard of  mystic  interpretation,  but  proceeds  to  call  the  harmony  between  the  two  Testaments 
"a  canon  for  the  Church,"  Strom,  vi.  15,  124,  125.  Eusebius  speaks  of  "the  ecclesiastical 
canon  "  which  recognized  no  other  Gospels  than  the  four  (vi.  25).  The  use  of  the  term  and 
its  cognates  in  reference  to  the  Scriptures  is  explained  by  Westcott  in  a  passive  sense  so 
that  "  canonized  "  books,  as  Athanasius  calls  them  (Fest.  Ep.  39),  are  books  expressly  recog- 
nized by  the  Church  as  portions  of  Holy  Scripture.  Again,  as  to  matters  of  observance, 
Clement  of  Alexandria  wrote  a  book  against  Judaizers,  called  "  The  Church's  Canon  "  (Euseb. 
vi.  13)  ;  and  Cornelius  of  Rome,  in  his  letter  to  Fabius,  speaks  of  the  "  canon  "  as  to  what  we 
call  confirmation  (Euseb.  vi.  43),  and  Dionysius  of  the  "  canon  "  as  to  reception  of  converts 
from  heresy  (ib.  vii.  7).  The  Nicene  Council  in  this  canon  refers  to  a  standing  "  canon  "  of 
discipline  (comp.  Nic.  2,  5,  6,  9,  10,  15,  16,  18),  but  it  does  not  apply  the  term  to  its  own 
enactments,  which  are  so  described  in  the  second  canon  of  Constantinople  (see  below),  and 
of  which  Socrates  says  "  that  it  passed  what  are  usually  called  '  canons  '  "  (i.  13),  as  Julius  of 
Rome  calls  a  decree  of  this  Council  a  "canon"  (Athan.  Apol.  c.  Ari.  25)  ;  so  Athanasius 
applies  the  term  generally  to  Church  laws  (Encycl.  2  ;  cp.  Apol.  c.  Ari.  69).  The  use  of 
kulvwv  for  the  clerical  body  (Nic.  16,  17,  19  ;  Chalc.  2)  is  explained  by  Westcott  with  refer- 
ence to  the  rule  of  clerical  life,  but  Bingham  traces  it  to  the  roll  or  official  list  on  which  the 
names  of  clerics  were  enrolled  (i.  5,  10)  ;  and  this  appears  to  be  the  more  natural  derivation, 
see  "  the  holy  canon  "  in  the  first  canon  of  the  Council  of  Antioch,  and  compare  Socrates  (i. 
17),  "  the  Virgins  enumerated  iv  t<3  tw  ckkX^o-iwv  kovovi,"  and  (ib.  v.  19)  on  the  addition  of  a 
penitentiary  "  to  the  canon  of  the  church  ;  "  see  also  George  of  Laodicea  in  Sozomon,  iv.  13. 
Hence  any  cleric  might  be  called  Kavovi*os,  see  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  Procatech.  4  ;  so  we  read 
of  "  canonical  singers."     Laodicea,  canon  xv.     The  same  notion  of  definiteness  appears  in 


10  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


the  ritual  use  of  the  word  for  a  series  of  nine  "  odes  "  in  the  Eastern  Church  service  (Neale, 
Introd.  East.  Ch.  ii.  832),  for  the  central  and  unvarying  element  in  the  Liturgy,  beginning 
-after  the  Tersanctus  (Hammond,  Liturgies  East  and  West,  p.  377) ;  or  for  any  Church  office 
(Ducange  in  v.) ;  also  in  its  application  to  a  table  for  the  calculation  of  Easter  (Euseb.  vi.  22  ; 
vii.  32)  ;  to  a  scheme  for  exhibiting  the  common  and  peculiar  parts  of  the  several  Gospels  (as 
the  "  Eusebian  canons  ")  and  to  a  prescribed  or  ordinary  payment  to  a  church,  a  use  which 
grew  out  of  one  found  in  Athanasius'  Apol.  c.  Ari.  60. 

In  more  recent  times  a  tendency  has  appeared  to  restrict  the  term  Canon  to  matters  of 
discipline,  but  the  Council  of  Trent  continued  the  ancient  use  of  the  word,  calling  its  doc- 
trinal and  disciplinary  determinations  alike  "Canons." 

CANON  II. 

Forasmuch  as,  either  from  necessity,  or  through  the  urgency  of  individuals,  many 
things  have  been  done  contrary  to  the  Ecclesiastical  canon,  so  that  men  just  converted 
from  heathenism  to  the  faith,  and  who  have  been  instructed  but  a  little  while,  are 
straightway  brought  to  the  spiritual  laver,  and  as  soon  as  they  have  been  baptized,  are 
advanced  to  the  episcopate  or  the  presbyterate,  it  has  seemed  right  to  us  that  for  the 
time  to  come  no  such  thing  shall  be  done.  For  to  the  catechumen  himself  there  is 
need  of  time  and  of  a  longer  trial  after  baptism.  For  the  apostolical  saying  is  clear, 
"  Not  a  novice  ;  lest,  being  lifted  up  with  pride,  he  fall  into  condemnation  and  the 
snare  of  the  devil."  But  if,  as  time  goes  on,  any  sensual  sin  should  be  found  out  about 
the  person,  and  he  should  be  convicted  by  two  or  three  witnesses,  let  him  cease  from 
the  clerical  office.  And  whoso  shall  transgress  these  [enactments]  will  imperil  his  own 
clerical  position,  as  a  person  who  presumes  to  disobey  the  great  Synod. 

NOTES. 

Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  II. 


others,  unless  by  a  peculiar  divine  grace." 
The  expression  of  the  canon  of  Nicsea,  xpvx^ov 
n  afjLaprrjiJLa,  is  not  easy  to  explain  :  some  ren- 
der it  by  the  Latin  words  animate  peccatam, 
UhouJ  a  probation  of  some  time  a  neophyte   b  u  ^  that  the  Cmmcil  has  here  fspecially 

But  if  after  ordi-  |  ^  view  ^  of  ^  flegh     but  ag  ^J^  ^ 


Those  who  have  come  from  the  heathen  shall 
not  be  immediately  advanced  to  the  presbyterate, 
For  with 
is  nf  no  advantage  (k<lk6<;).     But  if  aft 


nation  U  be found  out  that  he  had  sinned  pre-  ^    ^  AfJLapT^aTa.     We  must 

viously,    let   him   then   be   expelled  from   the   t^^^jerstand  the  passage  in  question  to  re- 
JJ'  i  fer  to  a  capital  and  very  serious  offence,  as  the 

Hefele.  !  penalty  of  deposition  annexed  to  it  points  out. 

It  may  be  seen  by  the  very  text  of  this  ■  These  words  have  also  given  offence,  ci  hi 
canon,  that  it  was  already  forbidden  to  bap- :  irpoiovTos  tov  xpw°v  >'  that  is  to  say,  "It  is 
tize,  and  to  raise  to  the  episcopate  or  to  the  '  necessary  henceforward,"  etc.,  understanding 
priesthood  anyone  who  had  only  been  a  cate- !  that  it  is  only  those  who  have  been  too  quickly 
chumen  for  a  short  time  :  this  injunction  is  ordained  who  are  threatened  with  deposition 
in  fact  contained  in  the  eightieth  (seventy-  in  case  they  are  guilty  of  crime  ;  but  the  can- 
ninth)  apostolical  canon  ;  and  according  to  on  is  framed,  and  ought  to  be  understood, 
that,  it  would  be  older  than  the  Council  of  in  a  general  manner:  it  applies  to  all  other 
Nictea.  There  have  been,  nevertheless,  certain  clergymen,  but  it  appears  also  to  point  out 
cases  in  which,  for  urgent  reasons,  an  excep-  that  greater  severity  should  be  shown  toward 
tion  lias  been  made  to  the  rule  of  the  Coun-  those  who  have  been  too  quickly  ordained, 
cil  of  Nicaea — for  instance,  that  of  8.  Ambrose.  Others  have  explained  the  passage  in  this 
The  canon  of  Nicaa  does  not  seem  to  allow  manner  :  "  If  it  shall  become  known  that  any 
such  an  exception,  but  it  might  be  justified  one  who  has  been  too  quickly  ordained  was 
by  the  apostolical  canon,  which  says,  at  the  guilty  before  his  baptism  of  any  serious  of- 
close  :  "It  is  not  ri^ht  that  any  one  who  has  fence,  he  ought  to  be  deposed."  This  is  the 
not  yet  been  proved  should  be  a  teacher  of   interpretation  given  by  Gratian,  but  it  must 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


11 


be  confessed  that  such  a  translation  does  vio- 
lence to  the  text.  This  is,  I  believe,  the  gen- 
eral sense  of  the  canon,  and  of  this  passage  in 
particular  :  "  Henceforward  no  one  shall  be 
baptized  or  ordained  quickly.  As  to  those 
already  in  orders  (without  any  distinction 
between  those  who  have  been  ordained  in  due 
course  and  those  who  have  been  ordained  too 
quickly),  the  rule  is  that  they  shall  be  de- 


posed if  they  commit  a  serious  offence.  Those 
who  are  guilty  of  disobedience  to  this  great 
Synod,  either  by  allowing  themselves  to  be 
ordained  or  even  by  ordaining  others  pre- 
maturely, are  threatened  with  deposition  ipso 
facto,  and  for  this  fault  alone."  We  consider, 
in  short,  that  the  last  words  of  the  canon  may 
be  understood  as  well  of  the  ordained  as  of 
the  ordainer.        * 


CANON  III. 


The  great  Synod  has  stringently  forbidden  any  bishop,  presbyter,  deacon,  or  any 
one  of  the  clergy  whatever,  to  have  a  subintroducta  dwelling  with  him,  except  only  a 
mother,  or  sister,'  or  aunt,  or  such  persons  only  as  are  beyond  all  suspicion. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  III. 
No  one  shall  have  a  woman  in  his  house  ex- 
cept his  mother,  and  sister,  and  2ierso7is  alto- 
gether beyond  suspicion. 

Justellus. 
Who  these  mulieres  subintroductae  were 
does  not  sufficiently  appear  .  .  .  but  they 
were  neither  wives  nor  concubines,  but  wom- 
en of  some  third  kind,  which  the  clergy  kept 
with  them,  not  for  the  sake  of  offspring  or 
lust,  but  from  the  desire,  or  certainly  under  the 
pretence,  of  piety. 

Johnson. 
For  want  of  a  proper  English  word  to  ren- 
der it  by,  I  translate  "  to  retain  any  woman  in 
their  houses  under  pretence  of  her  being  a 
disciple  to  them." 

Van  Espen 

translates :  And  his  sisters  and  aunts  cannot 
remain  unless  they  be  free  from  all  suspicion. 


already  spread  widely.  In  connexion  with  this 
whole  subject  of  the  subintroductae  the  text 
of  St.  Paul  should  be  carefully  considered. 
1  Cor.  ix.  5. 

Hefele. 

It  is  very  certain  that  the  canon  of  Nice 
forbids  such  spiritual  unions,  but  the  context 
shows  moreover  that  the  Fathers  had  not 
these  particular  cases  in  view  alone  ;  and  the 
expression  o-weto-aKTos  should  be  understood 
of  every  woman  who  is  introduced  (cnWo-aKTos) 
into  the  house  of  a  clergyman  for  the  purpose 
of  living  there.  If  by  the  word  o-wei'o-aKTos 
was  only  intended  the  wife  in  this  spiritual 
marriage,  the  Council  would  not  have  said, 
any  oweio-axTos,  except  his  mother,  etc.  ;  for 
neither  his  mother  nor  his  sister  could  have 
formed  this  spiritual  union  with  the  cleric. 
The  injunction,  then,  does  not  merely  forbid 
the  o-uv€t'o-a«Tos  in  the  specific  sense,  but  orders 
that  "  no  woman  must  live  in  the  house  of  a 
cleric,  unless  she  be  his  mother,"  etc. 


Fuchs  in  his  Bibliothek  der  kirchenver  j  This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
sammlungen  confesses  that  this  canon  shews  Canonici,  Gratian's  Decretum,  Pars  I.,  Distinc. 
that    the    practice    of   clerical  celibacy  had 'XXXIL,  C.  xvj. 


CANON  IV. 

It  is  by  all  means  proper  that  a  bishop  should  be  appointed  by  all  the  bishops  in  the 
province ;  but  should  this  be  difficult,  either  on  account  of  urgent  necessity  or  because 
of  distance,  three  at  least  should  meet  together,  and  the  suffrages  of  the  absent  [bishops] 
also  being  given  and  communicated  in  writing,  then  the  ordination  should  take  place. 
But  in  every  province  the  ratification  of  what  is  done  should  be  left  to  the  Metropolitan. 


NOTES 

Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  IV. 

A  bishop  is  to  be  chosen  by  all  the  bishops  of 
the  jjrovince,  or  at  least  by  three,  the  rest  giv- 
ing by  letter  their  assent;  but  this  choice  must 
be  confirmed  by  the  Metropolitan. 


ZONARAS. 

The  present  Canon  might  seem  to  be  op- 
posed to  the  first  canon  of  the  Holy  Apostles, 
for  the  latter  enjoins  that  a  bishop  be  or- 
dained by  two  or  three  bishops,  but  this  by 


12 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


three,  the  absent  also  agreeing  and  testifying 
their  assent  by  writing.  But  they  are  not 
contradictory  ;  for  the  Apostolical  canon  by 
ordination  (xeiporoviav)  means  consecration 
and  imposition  of  hands,  but  the  present  can- 
on by  constitution  {Karadraariv)  and  ordination 
means  the  election,  and  enjoins  that  the  elec- 
tion of  a  bishop  do  not  take  place  unless  three 
assemble,  having  the  consent  also  of  the  absent 
by  letter,  or  a  declaration  that  they  also  will  ac- 
quiesce in  the  election  (or  vote,  </^<£w)  made  by 
the  three  who  have  assembled.  But  after  the 
election  it  gives  the  ratification  or  comple- 
tion of  the  matter — the  imposition  of  hands 
and  consecration — to  the  metropolitan  of  the 
province,  so  that  the  election  is  to  be  ratified 
by  him.  He  does  so  when  with  two  or  three 
bishops,  according  to  the  apostolical  canon, 
he  consecrates  with  imposition  of  hands  the 
one  of  the  elected  persons  whom  he  himself 
selects. 

Balsamon 
also  understands  KaSicrraaSai  to  mean  election 
by  vote. 

Bright. 

The  Greek  canonists  are  certainly  in  error 
when  they  interpret  x^porovla  of  election.  The 
canon  is  akin  to  the  1st  Apostolic  canon  which, 
as  the  canonists  admit,  must  refer  to  the  conse- 
cration of  a  new  bishop,  and  it  was  cited  in  that 
sense  at  the  Council  of  Chalcedon — Session 
xiii.  (Mansi.,  vii.  307).  We  must  follow  Ru- 
finus  and  the  old  Latin  translators,  who  speak 
of  "ordinari"  "ordinatio"  and  "manus  im- 
positionem." 

Hefele. 

The  Council  of  Nice  thought  it  necessary 
to  define  by  precise  rules  the  duties  of  the 
bishops  who  took  part  in  these  episcopal 
elections.  It  decided  (a)  that  a  single  bishop 
of  the  province  was  not  sufficient  for  the  ap- 
pointment of  another ;  (b)  three  at  least 
should  meet,  and  (c)  they  were  not  to  proceed 
to  election  without  the  written  permission  of 
the  absent  bishops  ;  it  was  necessary  (d)  to 
obtain  afterward  the  approval  of  the  metro- 
politan. The  Council  thus  confirms  the  ordi- 
nary metropolitan  division  in  its  two  most 
important  points,  namely,  the  nomination  and 
ordination  of  bishops,  and  the  superior  posi- 
tion of  the  metropolitan.  The  third  point 
connected  with  this  division  —  namely,  the 
provincial  synod — will  be  considered  under 
the  next  canon. 

Meletius  was  probably  the  occasion  of  this 
canon.     It  may  be  remembered  that  he  had 


nominated  bishops  without  the  concurrence 
of  the  other  bishops  of  the.  province,  and 
without  the  approval  of  the  metropolitan  of 
Alexandria,  and  had  thus  occasioned  a  schism. 
This  canon  was  intended  to  prevent  the  re- 
currence of  such  abuses.  The  question  Las 
been  raised  as  to  whether  the  fourth  canon 
speaks  only  of  the  choice  of  the  bishop,  or 
whether  it  also  treats  of  the  consecration  of 
the  newly  elected.  We  think,  with  Van  Es- 
pen,  that  it  treats  equally  of  both, — as  well  of 
the  part  which  the  bishops  of  the  province 
should  take  in  an  episcopal  election,  as  of  the 
consecration  which  completes  it. 

This  canon  has  been  interpreted  in  two 
ways.  The  Greeks  had  learnt  by  bitter 
experience  to  distrust  the  interference  of 
princes  and  earthly  potentates  in  episcopal 
elections.  Accordingly,  they  tried  to  prove 
that  this  canon  of  Nice  took  away  from  the 
people  the  right  of  voting  at  the  nomination 
of  a  bishop,  and  confined  the  nomination  ex- 
clusively to  the  bishops  of  the  province. 

The  Greek  Commentators,  Balsamon  and 
others,  therefore,  only  followed  the  example 
of  the  Seventh  and  [so-called]  Eighth  (Ecu- 
menical Councils  in  affirming  tbat  this  fourth 
canon  of  Nice  takes  away  from  the  people  the 
right  previously  possessed  of  voting  in  the 
choice  of  bishops  and  makes  the  election  de- 
pend entirely  on  the  decision  of  the  bishops 
of  the  province. 

The  Latin  Church  acted  otherwise.  It  is 
true  that  with  it  also  the  people  have  been  re- 
moved from  episcopal  elections,  but  this  did 
not  happen  till  later,  about  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury ;  and  it  was  not  the  people  only  who  were 
removed,  but  the  bishops  of  the  province  as 
well,  and  the  election  was  conducted  entirely 
by  the  clergy  of  the  Cathedral  Church.  The 
Latins  then  interpreted  the  canon  of  Nice  as 
though  it  said  nothing  of  the  rights  of  the 
bishops  of  the  province  in  the  elect  ion  of  their 
future  colleague  (and  it  does  not  speak  of  it 
in  a  very  explicit  manner),  and  as  though  it 
determined  these  two  points  only  ;  (a)  that  for 
the  ordination  of  a  bishop  three  bishops  at 
least  are  necessary  ;  (b)  that  the  right  of 
confirmation  rests  with  the  metropolitan. 

The  wThole  subject  of  episcopal  elections  is 
treated  fully  by  Van  Espen  and  by  Thomas- 
sin,  in  Ancienne  et  Nouvelle  Discipline  de 
I'figlise,  P.  II.  1.  2. 

This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici,  Gratian's  Decretum,  Pars  I.  Dist. 
LXIV.  c.  j. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325  13 


CANON   V. 

Concerning  those,  whether  of  the  clergy  or  of  the  laity,  who  have  been  excommuni- 
zated  in  the  several  provinces,  let  the  provision  of  the  canon  be  observed  by  the 
bishops  which  provides  that  persons  cast  out  by  some  be  not  readmitted  by  others. 
Nevertheless,  inquiry  should  be  made  whether  they  have  been  excommunicated  through 
captiousness,  or  contentiousness,  or  any  such  like  ungracious  disposition  in  the  bishop. 
And,  that  this  matter  may  have  due  investigation,  it  is  decreed  that  in  every  province 
synods  shall  be  held  twice  a  year,  in  order  that  when  all  the  bishops  of  the  province  are 
assembled  together,  such  questions  may  by  them  be  thoroughly  examined,  that  so  those 
who  have  confessedly  offended  against  their  bishop,  may  be  seen  by  all  to  be  for  just 
cause  excommunicated,  until  it  shall  seem  fit  to  a  general  meeting  of  the  bishops  to  pro- 
nounce a  milder  sentence  upon  them.  And  let  these  synods  be  held,  the  one  before 
Lent,  (that  the  pure  Gift  may  be  offered  to  God  after  all  bitterness  has  been  put  away), 
and  let  the  second  be  held  about  autumn. 

NOTES. 

Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  V.  Hefele. 

Such  as  have  been  excommunicated  by  certain  '  n  Gelaf  u«  ^as  jf™   ™  .h™  history  of  th* 

huhnnn  xhnll  not  be  restored  bu  others  unless  Council  of  Nice,  the  text  of  the  canons  passed 
bishops  shall  not  be  lestmea  Oy  others  unless  Council ;  and  it  must  be  noticed  that 

the  excommunication  was  the  result  of  pusil-  "•>      c .     ,  *.. ,,    ,.„.  ,    ,  ,. 

lanvmUy,  or  strife,  or  some  other  similar  cause.  ?"**  ™  here  a  sl*?ht  difference  between  his 

And  that  this  mky  be  duly  attended  to,  there  shall  Jfxt  and  ours.     Our  reading  is  as  follows  : 

be  in  each  year  two  synods  in  every  province-  ''Tbe  excommunication   continues  to  be  in 

the  one  before  Lent,  the  other  toward  autumn.       £«»  un/tl1  *  sef m  S°°d  to  *e  assembly  of 
J  bishops  (ro»  koivw)  to  soften  it.       (j-elasius,  on 

__                              n          ,        .,  . ,  the  other  hand,  writes  :  mcypis  av  tu  kolvu  r)  tu> 

There  has  always  been  found  the  greatest  ^^     K>  T#  x    that  is  to  say>  «until  it  seem 

difficulty  m  securing  the  regular  meetings  of  d   ^  the  assembl     of  bisbopSj  or  to   the 

provincial  and  diocesan   synods  and  despite  ^  ,        (wbo  bag           ed  the    sentence),"  etc. 

the  very  explicit  canonical  legislation  upon  _        ^     Dionysius  the  Less  has  also  followed 

the  subject,  and  the  severe  penalties  attached  tbig  variation;  as  his  translation  of  the  canon 

to  those  not  answering  the  summons,  in  large  gbowg>      u    doeg   no{.    cb            tbe   essential 

parts  of  the  Church  for  centuries  these  coun-  meani        of  tbe                 .  for  it            be  weU 

cils  have  been  of  the  rarest  occurrence.     Zo-  understood  that  the  bishop  who  has  passed 

naras  complains  that  m  his  time  "  these  synods  tbe  sentenee  of  excommunication  has  also  the 

were    everywhere   treated    with    great    com  •   bt  to  mitigate  it-    But  tbe  variation  adopted 

tempt     and  that  they  had  actually  ceased  to  by   tbe   Prism   altergj  on   tbe   contraiy>  tbe 

beheld.  ^  whole  sense  of  the  canon  :  the  Prisca  has  not 

Possibly  the  opinion  of   St.  Gregory  Na-   TW  KOlv£>  but  only  &r«rKd™ :  it  is  in  this  errone- 
zianzen  had  grown  common  for  it  will  be  re-   ous  form  tbat  the  canon  has  passed  into  the 
numbered  that  in  refusing  to  go  to  the  lat-    Corpus  jurisc  an. 
ter   sessions   01    the   Second  iiicumenical    he         x 

wrote,  "  I  am  resolved  to  avoid  every  meeting  This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
of  bishops,  for  I  have  never  seen  any  synod  Canonici,  Gratian's  Decretum,  Pars  II.,  Causa 
end  well,  nor  assuage  rather  than  aggravate  XL,  Qiuest.  III.,  Canon  lxxiij.,  and  the  latter 
disorders."  '  part  in  Pars  I.,  Distinc.  XVIII.,  c.  iij. 

EXCUKSUS  ON  THE  WORD  Upo<r<pepetV. 

(Dr.  Adolph  Harnack  :  Hist,  of  Dogma  [Eng.  Tr.]  Vol.  I.  p.  209.) 

The  idea  of  the  whole  transaction  of  the  Supper  as  a  sacrifice,  is  plainly  found  in  the  Di- 
dache,  (c.  14),  in  Ignatius,  and  above  all,  in  Justin  (I.  65f.)  But  even  Clement  of  Rome  pre- 
supposes it,  when  (in  cc.  40-44)  he  draws  a  parallel  between  bishops  and  deacons  and  the 

1  Greg.  Naz.  Ep.  ad  Frocop. ;  Migne  Pat.  Grcec.,  No.  cxzx. 


14  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


Priests  and  Levites  of  the  Old  Testament,  describing  as  the  chief  function  of  the  former 
(44.4)  7rpo(rcf>epeiv  t<z  8<upa.  This  is  not  the  place  to  enquire  whether  the  first  celebration  had,  in 
the  mind  of  its  founder,  the  character  of  a  sacrificial  meal ;  but,  certainly,  the  idea,  as  it  was 
already  developed  at  the  time  of  Justin,  had  been  created  by  the  churches.  Various  reasons 
tended  towards  seeing  in  the  Supper  a  sacrifice.  In  the  first  place,  Malachi  i.  11,  demanded 
a  solemn  Christian  sacrifice :  see  my  notes  on  Didache,  14.3.  In  the  second  place,  all  prayers 
were  regarded  as  a  sacrifice,  and  therefore  the  solemn  prayers  at  the  Supper  must  be  specially 
considered  as  such.  In  the  third  place,  the  words  of  institution  tovto  iroulre,  contained  a  com- 
mand with  regard  to  a  definite  religious  action.  Such  an  action,  however,  could  only  be  rep- 
resented as  a  sacrifice,  and  this  the  more,  that  the  Gentile  Christians  might  suppose  that  they 
had  to  understand  7rot€tv  in  the  sense  of  Oveiv.  In  the  fourth  place,  payments  in  kind  were 
necessary  for  the  "  agapse  "  connected  with  the  Supper,  out  of  which  were  taken  the  bread 
and  wine  for  the  Holy  celebration  ;  in  what  other  aspect  could  these  offerings  in  the  worship 
be  regarded  than  as  7rpoo-<popai  for  the  purpose  of  a  sacrifice?  Yet  the  spiritual  idea  so  pre- 
vailed that  only  the  prayers  were  regarded  as  the  Ovaia  proper,  even  in  the  case  of  Justin 
(Dial.  117).  The  elements  are  only  Swpa,  irpoa^opai,  which  obtain  their  value  from  the  prayers, 
in  which  thanks  are  given  for  the  gifts  of  creation  and  redemption,  as  well  as  for  the  holy 
meal,  and  entreaty  is  made  for  the  introduction  of  the  community  into  the  Kingdom  of  God 
(see  Didache,  9.  10).  Therefore,  even  the  sacred  meal  itself  is  called  cvxapio-Tia  (Justin,  Apol. 
I.  66 :  7)  TpcxpT)  avTi}  KaAeiTai  7rap'  rjptv  c^aptona.  Didache,  9.  1 :  Ignat.),  because  it  is  Tpa<pi) 
evxapi<TTT)6el<Ta.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Justin  already  understood  the  body  of  Christ 
to  be  the  object  of  ttoiciv,1  and  therefore  thought  of  a  sacrifice  of  this  body  (I.  66).  The  real 
sacrificial  act  in  the  Supper  consists  rather,  according  to  Justin,  only  in  the  evxapurriav  iroiftv, 
whereby  the  koivos  apros  becomes  the  apTos  rrj<;  evxapiortas.2  The  sacrifice  of  the  Supper  in  its 
essence,  apart  from  the  offering  of  alms,  which  in  the  practice  of  the  Church  was  closely 
united  with  it,  is  nothing  but  a  sacrifice  of  prayer :  the  sacrificial  act  of  the  Christian  here 
also  is  nothing  else  than  an  act  of  prayer  (See  Apol.  I.  14,  65-67 ;  Dial.  28,  29,  41,  70, 
116-118). 

Harnack  (lib.  cit.  Vol.  II.  chapter  III.  p.  136)  says  that  "Cyprian  was  the  first  to  associ- 
ate the  specific  offering,  i.e.  the  Lord's  Supper  with  the  specific  priesthood.  Secondly,  he 
was  the  first  to  designate  the  passio  Domini,  nay,  the  sanguis  Christi  and  the  dominica  hostia 
as  the  object  of  the  eucharistic  offering."  In  a  foot-note  (on  the  same  page)  he  explains  that 
"  Sacrificare,  Sacrificium  celebrare  in  all  passages  where  they  are  unaccompanied  by  any 
qualifying  words,  mean  to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper."  But  Harnack  is  confronted  by  the 
very  evident  objection  that  if  this  was  an  invention  of  St.  Cyprian's,  it  is  most  extraordinary 
that  it  raised  no  protest,  and  he  very  frankly  confesses  (note  2,  on  same  page)  that  "the 
transference  of  the  sacrificial  idea  to  the  consecrated  elements  which  in  all  probability  Cy- 
prian already  found  in  existence,  etc."  Hamack  further  on  (in  the  same  note  on  p.  137)  notes 
that  he  has  pointed  out  in  his  notes  on  the  Didache  that  in  the  "  Apostolic  Church  Order  " 
Occurs  the  expression  rj  7rpoo-(£opa  tov  cruipaTos  /cai  tou  aipai-os. 

1  Harnack  seems  to  know  only  the  printed  (and  almost  certainly  !  gian  teaches  that  the  essence  of  that  sacrifice  is  to  offer  up  the 
incorrect)  reading  of  the  modern  texts  of  the  I  Apology  (Chap-  j  already  present  Body  of  Christ,  but  that  the  essence  of  the  Sacri- 
ter  LX  VI)  where  toCto  co-ti  has  taken  the  place  of  rouTeon.    The    flee  is  the  act  of  consecration;  the  "making  the  Eucharistic 

TovrtcTTt  to    Sacrifice,"  as  he  accurately  says,  "  whereby  the  common  bread 


passage  did  read  touto  Troteire,  eis  Tqv  a.vav.vr)<T<.v  /U.OU,  tovt«<tti  to  Sacrifice,     as  ne  accurately  says,      wnereDy  me  common  Dreaa 

criwd  ]iov  ;  in  which  it  is  evident  that  the  words  "  my  body  "  are  becomes  the  Bread  of  the  Eucharist."    Harnack  says  truly  that 

in  apposition  with  toCto  and  the  object  of  noit Irt,  which  has  "  the  sacrificial  act  of  the  Christian  *i  ;re  also  is  nothing  else  than 

its  sacrificial  sense  "  to  offer,"  as  in  the  Dialogue  with  Trypho,  an  act  of  prayer,"  but  he  does  not  seem  to  know  that  this  is  the 
6  Kiiptot  iinw  napi&ioKt  Troitiy  (chapter  xlj).                                         I  Catholic  doctrine  to-day,  nor  to  appreciate  at  its  Catholic  value  the 

J  Harnack  evidently  does  not  fully  appreciate  the  Catholic  doc-  "  Prayer  of  Consecration."    The  act  of  consecration  is  the  essence 

trine  of  the  Sacrifice  in  the  Holy  Eucharist.    No  Catholic  theolo-  of  the  Christian  Sacrifice  according  to  the  teaching  of  all  Catholics. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


15 


CANON  VI. 

Let  the  ancient  customs  in  Egypt,  Libya  and  Pentapolis  prevail,  that  the  Bishop 
of  Alexandria  have  jurisdiction  in  all  these,  since  the  like  is  customary  for  the  Bishop 
of  Home  also.  Likewise  in  Antioch  and  the  other  provinces,  let  the  Churches  retain 
their  privileges.  And  this  is  to  be  universally  understood,  that  if  any  one  be  made 
bishop  without  the  consent  of  the  Metropolitan,  the  great  Synod  has  declared  that  such 
a  man  ought  not  to  be  a  bishop.  If,  however,  two  or  three  bishops  shall  from  natural 
love  of  contradiction,  oppose  the  common  suffrage  of  the  rest,  it  being  reasonable  and 
in  accordance  with  the  ecclesiastical  law,  then  let  the  choice  of  the  majority  prevail. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  op  Canon  VI. 


The  Bishop  of  Alexandria  shall  have  juris- 
diction over  Egypt,  Libya,  and  Pentapolis.  As 
als"  the  Roman  bishop  over  those  subject  to 
Rome.  So,  too,  the  Bishop  of  Antioch  and  the 
rest  over  those  who  are  under  them.  If  any  be 
a  bishop  contrary  to  the  judgment  of  the  Metro- 
politan, let  him  be  no  bishop.  Provided  it  be 
in  accordance  ivilh  the  canons  by  the  suffrage  of 
the  majority,  if  three  object,  their  objection  shall 
be  of  no  force. 

Many,  probably  most,  commentators  have 
considered  this  the  most  important  and  most 
interesting  of  all  the  Niceue  canons,  and  a 
whole  library  of  works  has  been  written  upon 
it,  some  of  the  works  asserting  and  some  de- 
nying what  are  commonly  called  the  Papal 
claims.  If  any  one  wishes  to  see  a  list  of  the 
most  famous  of  these  works  he  will  find  it  in 
Phillips's  Kirchenrecht  (Bd.  ii.  S.  35).  I  shall 
reserve  what  I  have  to  say  upon  this  subject 
to  the  notes  on  a  canon  which  seems  really 
to  deal  with  it,  confining  myself  here  to  an 
elucidation  of  the  words  found  in  the  canon 
before  us. 

Hammond,  W.  A. 

The  object  and  intention  of  this  canon  seems 
clearly  to  have  been,  not  to  introduce  any  new 
powers  or  regulations  into  the  Church,  but  to 
confirm  and  establish  ancient  customs  already 
existing.  This,  indeed,  is  evident  from  the 
very  first  words  of  it :  "Let  the  ancient  cus- 
toms be  maintained."  It  appears  to  have  been 
made  with  particular  reference  to  the  case  of 
the  Church  of  Alexandria,  which  had  been 
troubled  by  the  irregular  proceedings  of  Mile- 
tius,  and  to  confirm  the  ancient  privileges  of 
that  see  which  he  had  invaded.  The  latter 
part  of  it,  however,  applies  to  all  Metropoli- 
tans, and  confirms  all  their  ancient  privileges. 

Ffoulkes. 
(Diet.  Christ.  Antiq.  voce  Council  of  Nicsea). 

The  first  half  of  the  canon  enacts  merely 
that  what  had  long  been  customary  with  re- 


spect to  such  persons  in  every  province  should 
become  law,  beginning  with  the  province 
where  this  principle  had  been  infringed ; 
while  the  second  half  declares  what  was  in 
future  to  be  received  as  law  on  two  points 
which  custom  had  not  as  yet  expressly  ruled. 
Nobody  disputes  the  meaning  of  this 
last  half ;  nor,  in  fact,  would  the  meaning  of 
the  first  half  have  been  questioned,  had  it  not 
included  Rome.  .  .  .  Nobody  can  main- 
tain that  the  bishops  of  Antioch  and  Alexan- 
dria were  called  patriarchs  then,  or  that  the 
jurisdiction  they  had  then  was  co-extensive 
with  what  they  had  afterward,  when  they 
were  so  called.  .  .  .  It  is  on  this  clause 
["  since  the  like  is  customary  for  the  Bishops 
of  Rome  also"]  standing  parenthetically  be- 
tween what  is  decreed  for  the  particular  cases 
of  Egypt  and  Antioch,  and  in  consequence  of 
the  interpretation  given  to  it  by  Runnus, 
more  particularly,  that  so  much  strife  has  been 
raised.  Rufiuus  may  rank  low  as  a  translator, 
yet,  being  a  native  of  Aquileia,  he  cannot  have 
been  ignorant  of  Roman  ways,  nor,  on  the 
other  hand,  had  he  greatly  misrepresented 
them,  would  his  version  have  waited  till  the 
seventeenth  century  to  be  impeached. 

Hefele. 

The  sense  of  the  first  words  of  the  canon  is 
as  follows  :  "  This  ancient  right  is  assigned  to 
the  Bishop  of  Alexandria  which  places  under 
his  jurisdiction  the  whole  diocese  of  Egypt." 
It  is  without  any  reason,  then,  that  the  French 
Protestant  Salmasius  (Saumaise),  the  Anglican 
Beveridge,  and  the  Gallican  Launoy,  try  to 
show  that  the  Council  of  Nice  granted  to  the 
Bishop  of  Alexandria  only  the  rights  of  ordi- 
nary metropolitans. 

Bishop  Stillingfleet. 
I  do  confess  there  was  something  peculiar 
in  the  case  of  the  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  for 
all  the  provinces  of  Egypt  were  under  his  im- 
mediate care,  which  was  Patriarchal  as  to  ex- 
tent, but  Metropolical  in  the  administration. 


16 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


JuSTELLUS. 

This  authority  (e£owia)  is  that  of  a  Metro- 
politan which  the  Nicene  Fathers  decreed  to 
be  his  due  over  the  three  provinces  named  in 
this  canon,  Egypt,  Libya,  and  Pentapolis, 
which  made  up  the  whole  diocese  of  Egypt,  as 
well  in  matters  civil  as  ecclesiastical. 

On  this  important  question  Hefele  refers 
to  the  dissertation  of  Dupin,  in  his  work  Be 
Antiqua  Ecclesice  Bisciplina.  Hefele  says : 
"  It  seems  to  me  beyond  a  doubt  that  in  this 
canon  there  is  a  question  about  that  which 
was  afterward  called  the  patriarchate  of  the 
Bishop  of  Alexandria ;  that  is  to  say  that  he 
had  a  certain  recognized  ecclesiastical  author- 
ity, not  only  over  several  civil  provinces,  but 
also  over  several  ecclesiastical  provinces  (which 
had  their  own  metropolitans)  ; "  and  further 
on  (p.  392)  he  adds  :  "  It  is  incontestable  that 
the  civil  provinces  of  Egypt,  Libya,  Pentapolis 
and  Thebais,  which  were  all  in  subjection  to 


the  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  were  also  ecclesias- 
tical provinces  with  their  own  metropolitans ; 
and  consequently  it  is  not  the  ordinary  rights 
of  metropolitans  that  the  Sixth  Canon  of  Nice 
confers  on  the  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  but  the 
rights  of  a  superior  Metropolitan,  that  is,  of  a 
Patriarch." 

There  only  remains  to  see  what  were  the 
bounds  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Bishop  of 
Antioch.  The  civil  diocese  of  Oriens  is  shewn 
by  the  Second  Canon  of  Constantinople  to  be 
conterminous  with  what  was  afterward  called 
the  Patriarchate  of  Antioch.  The  see  of  An- 
tioch had,  as  we  know,  several  metropolitans 
subject  to  it,  among  them  Caesarea,  under 
whose  jurisdiction  was  Palestine.  Justellus, 
however,  is  of  opinion  that  Pope  Innocent  I. 
was  in  error  when  he  asserted  that  all  the 
Metropolitans  of  Oriens  were  to  be  ordained 
by  him  by  any  peculiar  authority,  and  goes 
so  far  as  to  stigmatize  his  words  as  "  contrary 
to  the  mind  of  the  Nicene  Synod."1 


EXCURSUS  ON    THE  EXTENT  OF    THE   JURISDICTION   OF  THE    BISHOP   OF 

ROME   OVER  THE  SUBURBICAN   CHURCHES. 

Although,  as  Hefele  well  says,  "  It  is  evident  that  the  Council  has  not  in  view  here  the 
primacy  of  the  Bishop  of  Rome  over  the  whole  Church,  but  simply  his  power  as  a  patriarch," 
yet  it  may  not  be  unimportant  to  consider  what  his  patriarchal  limits  may  have  been. 

(Hefele,  Hist.  Councils,  Vol.  I.,  p.  397.) 
The  translation  of  this  [VI.]  canon  by  Rufinus  has  been  especially  an  apple  of  discord. 
Et  ut  apud  Alexandriam  et  in  urbe  Roma  vetusta  consuetudo  servetur,  ut  vel  Me  Egypti  vel  hie 
suburbicariarum  ecclesiarum  sollicitudinem  gerat.  In  the  seventeenth  century  this  sentence 
of  Rufinus  gave  rise  to  a  very  lively  discussion  between  the  celebrated  jurist,  Jacob  Goth- 
fried  (Gothofredus),  and  his  friend,  Salmasius,  on  one  side,  and  the  Jesuit,  Sirmond,  on  the 
other.  The  great  prefecture  of  Italy,  which  contained  about  a  third  of  the  whole  Roman 
Empire,  was  divided  into  four  vicariates,  among  which  the  vicariate  of  Rome  was  the  first. 
At  its  head  were  two  officers,  the  prcefectus  urbi  and  the  vicarius  urbis.  The  prcefectus  nrbi 
exercised  authority  over  the  city  of  Rome,  and  further  in  a  suburban  circle  as  far  as  the  hun- 
dredth milestone.  The  boundary  of  the  vicarius  urbis  comprised  ten  provinces — Campania, 
Tuscia  with  Ombria,  Picenum,  Valeria,  Samnium,  Apulia  with  Calabria,  Lucania  and  that  of 
the  Brutii,  Sicily,  Sardinia,  and  Corsica.  Gothfried  and  Salmasius  maintained,  that  by  the 
regiones  suburbicarice  the  little  territory  of  the  prcefectus  urbi  must  be  understood  ;  while, 
according  to  Sirmond,  these  words  designate  the  whole  territory  of  the  vicarius  urbis.  In 
our  time  Dr.  Maasen  has  proved  in  his  book,2  already  quoted  several  times,  that  Gothfried  and 
Salmasius  were  right  in  maintaining  that,  by  the  regiones  suburbicarice,  the  little  territory  of 
the  prcefectus  urbi  must  be  alone  understood. 

Hefele  thinks  that  Phillips  "  has  proved  "  that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  had  patriarchal  rights 
over  places  outside  the  limits  of  the  ten  provinces  of  the  vicarius  urbis  ;  but  does  not  agree 


'  Contra  rnentem.  Synodi  Nicami. 

1  Friedrich  Maasen  :  Der  l'rimat  des  IHschofs  von  Horn,  und 
die  alien  I'atriarchalkirchen.    Bonn,  1963.    S  100-110.     Maasen 


goes  on  to  express  the  opinion  that  the  patriarchal  power  of  Rome 
was  much  larger. 


I,  NICE.     A.D.  325  I,' 


with  Phillips  in  thinking  Rufinus  in  error.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  point  is  a  difficult  olj, 
<mu  has  little  to  do  with  the  gist  of  the  meaning  of  the  canon.  One  thing  is  certain  :  tho 
early  Latin  version  of  the  canons,  called  the  l'risca,  was  not  satisfied  with  the  Greek  wording 
and  made  the  Canon  read  thus  :  "  It  is  of  ancient  custom  that  the  bishop  of  the  city  ot 
Rome  should  nave  a  primacy  (principatum),  so  that  he  should  govern  with  care  the  suburbi- 
can  places,  and  all  his  own  province."  1  Another  interesting  reading  is  that  found  in  several 
MSS.  which  begins,  "  The  Church  of  Rome  hath  always  had  a  primacy  (primal urn),"  and  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  early  date  of  this  addition  is  evinced  by  the  fact  that  the  canon  was 
actually  quoted  in  this  shape  by  Paschasinus  at  the  Council  of  Chalcedon. 

Hefele  further  on  says,  "  The  Greek  commentators  Zonaras  and  Balsamon  (of  the  twelfth 
century)  say  veiy  explicitly,  in  their  explanation  of  the  Canons  of  Nice,  that  this  sixth  canon 
confirms  the  rights  of  the  Bishop  of  Rome  as  patriarch  over  the  whole  West,"  and  refers  to 
Beveridge's  Syodicon,  Tom.  I.,  pp.  66  and  67.  After  diligent  search  I  can  find  nothing  to 
warrant  the  great  amplitude  of  this  statement.  Balsamon's  interpretation  is  very  vague, 
being  simply  that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  is  over  the  Western  Eparchies  (tw  kcnrtpiuiv  «Vap^iwi/) 
and  Zonaras  still  more  vaguely  says  that  w  io-rrepiw  apx^w  ZSos  iKparrjae.  That  the  whole 
West  was  in  a  general  way  understood  to  be  in  the  Roman  Patriarchate  I  have  no  doubt, 
that  the  Greek  scholiasts  just  quoted  deemed  it  to  be  so  I  think  most  probably  the  case,  but 
it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  they  have  said  so  in  the  particular  place  cited.  It  seems  to  me 
that  all  they  meant  to  say  was  that  the  custom  observed  at  Alexandria  and  Antioch  was  tw 
purely  Eastern  and  local  thing,  for  a  similar  state  of  affairs  was  found  in  the  West, 

CANON  VII. 

Sunge  custom  and  ancient  tradition  have  prevailed  that  the  Bishop  ot  iElia  [i.e.t 
Jerusalem]  should  be  honoured,  let  him,  saving  its  due  dignity  to  the  Metropolis,  have 
the  next  place  of  honour. 


NOTES 

Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  VII. 

Lei  the  Bishop   of  JElia  be  honoured,  the 


nghis  of  the  Metropolis  being  preserved  intact. 

There  would  seem  to  be  a  singular  fitness 
in  the  Holy  City  Jerusalem  holding  a  very  ex- 
alted position  among  the  sees  of  Christendom, 
and  it  may  appear  astonishing  that  in  the  ear- 
liest times  it  was  only  a  suffragan  see  to  the 
great  Church  of  Caesarea.  It  must  be  re- 
membered, however,  that  only  about  seventy 


the  second  century  the  idea  of  the  holiness  o: 
tho  site  began  to  lend  dignity  to  the  occupant 
of  the  see  ;  at  all  events  Eusebius 2  tells  us 
that  "  at  a  synod  held  on  the  subject  of  the 
Easter  controversy  in  the  time  of  Pope  Victor 
Theophilus  of  Csesarea  and  Narcissus  of  Jeru- 
salem were  presidents." 

It  was  this  feeling  of  reverence  which  in 
duced  the  passing  of  this  seventh  canon.     It 
is  very  hard  to  determine  just  what  was  the 
"precedence  "  granted  to  the  Bishop  of  iElia, 


years  after  our  Lord's  death  the  city  of  Jeru-  nor  is  it  clear  which  is  the  metropolis  referred 

3alem  was  entirely  destroyed  and  ploughed  as  to  in  the  last  clause.     Most  writers,  including 

i  field  according  to  the  prophet.     As  a  holy  Hefele,  Balsamon,  Aristenus  and  Beveridge 

city  Jerusalem  was  a  thing  of  the  past  for  consider  it   to  be   Csesarea  ;  while   Zonaras 


long  years,  and  it  is  only  in  the  beginning  of 
the  second  century  that  we  find  a  strong 
Christian  Church  growing  up  in  the  rapidly 
increasing  city,  called  no  longer  Jerusalem, 
out  iElia  Capitolina.     Possibly  by  the  end  of 


i  Vide  Labbe's  Observation.    Tom.  n.,  col.  4T. 


thinks  Jerusalem  to  be  intended,  a  view  re- 
cently adopted  and  defended  by  Fuchs  ; 3 
others  again  suppose  it  is  Antioch  that  is  re- 
ferred to. 

*  Ensebiua  :  Hist.  Eeel.    Lib.  v..  c.  23. 

•  Fuchs  :  Bib.  der  Kirehenversammlungen.    Bd.  i..  S.  399. 


18  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


EXCUKSUS  ON  THE  RISE  OF  THE  PATRIARCHATE  OF  JERUSALEM. 

The  narrative  of  the  successive  steps  by  which  the  See  of  Jerusalem  rose  from  being 
nothing  but  iElia,  a  Gentile  city,  into  one  of  the  five  patriarchal  sees  is  sad  reading  for  a 
Christian.  It  is  but  the  record  of  ambition  and,  worse  still,  of  knavery.  No  Christian  can 
for  a  moment  grudge  to  the  Holy  City  of  the  old  dispensation  the  honour  shewn  it  by  the 
Church,  but  he  may  well  wish  that  the  honour  had  been  otherwise  obtained.  A  careful  study 
of  such  recox'ds  as  we  possess  shews  that  until  the  fifth  century  the  Metropolitan  of  Caesarea 
as  often  took  precedence  of  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  as  vice  versa,  and  Beveridge  has  taken 
great  pains  to  shew  that  the  learned  De  Marca  is  in  error  in  supposing  that  the  Council  of 
Nice  assigned  to  Jerusalem  a  dignity  superior  to  Caesarea,  and  only  inferior  to  Rome,  Alex- 
andria, and  Antioch.  It  is  true  that  in  the  signatures  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  does  sign 
before  his  metropolitan,  but  to  this  Beveridge  justly  replies  that  the  same  is  the  case  with  the 
occupants  of  two  other  of  his  suffragan  sees.  Bishop  Beveridge's  opinion  is  that  the  Council 
assigned  Jerusalem  the  second  place  in  the  province,  such  as  London  enjoys  in  the  Province 
of  Canterbury.  This,  however,  would  seem  to  be  as  much  too  little  as  De  Marca's  contention 
grants  too  much.  It  is  certain  that  almost  immediately  after  the  Council  had  adjourned, 
the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  Maximus,  convoked  a  synod  of  Palestine,  without  any  reference  to 
Caesarea,  which  consecrated  bishops  and  acquitted  St.  Athanasius.  It  is  true  that  he  was 
reprimanded  for  doing  so,1  but  yet  it  clearly  shews  how  he  intended  to  understand  the 
action  of  Nice.  The  matter  was  not  decided  for  a  century  more,  and  then  through  the  chi- 
canery of  Juvenal  the  bishop  of  Jerusalem. 

(Canon  Venables,  Diet.  Christ.  Biography.) 

Juvenalis  succeeded  Praylius  as  bishop  of  Jerusalem  somewhere  about  420  a.d.  The  exact 
year  cannot  be  determined.  The  episcopate  of  Praylius,  which  commenced  in  417  a.d.,  was 
but  short,  and  we  can  hardly  give  it  at  most  more  than  three  years.  The  statement  of  Cyril 
of  Scythopolis,  in  his  Life  of  St.  Euthymius  (c.  96),  that  Juvenal  died  "  in  the  forty-fourth 
year  of  his  episcopate,"  458  a.d.,  is  certainly  incorrect,  as  it  would  make  his  episcopate  begin 
in  414  a.d.,  three  years  before  that  of  his  predecessor.  Juvenal  occupies  a  prominent  posi- 
tion during  the  Nestorian  and  Eutychian  troubles  towards  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century. 
But  the  pai-t  played  by  him  at  the  councils  of  Ephesus  and  Chalcedon,  as  well  as  at  the  dis- 
graceful XrjarpiKrj  crwoSos  of  449,  was  more  conspicuous  than  creditable,  and  there  are  few  of 
the  actors  in  these  turbulent  and  saddening  scenes  who  leave  a  more  unpleasing  impression. 
The  ruling  object  of  Juvenal's  episcopate,  to  which  everything  else  was  secondary,  and  which 
guided  all  his  conduct,  was  the  elevation  of  the  see  of  Jerusalem  from  the  subordinate  posi- 
tion it  held  in  accordance  with  the  seventh  of  the  canons  of  the  council  of  Niccoa,  as  suffragan 
to  the  metropolitan  see  of  Caesarea,  to  a  primary  place  in  the  episcopate.  Not  content  with 
aspiring  to  metropolitan  rank,  Juvenal  coveted  patriarchal  dignity,  and,  in  defiance  of  all 
canonical  authority,  he  claimed  jurisdiction  over  the  great  see  of  Antioch,  from  which  he 
sought  to  remove  Arabia  and  the  two  Phcenicias  to  his  own  province.  At  the  council  of 
Ephesus,  in  431,  he  asserted  for  "  the  apostolic  see  of  Jerusalem  the  same  rank  and  author- 
ity with  the  apostolic  see  of  Rome  "  (Labbe,  Concil.  iii.  642).  These  falsehoods  he  did  not 
scruple  to  support  with  forged  documents  ("insolenter  ausus  per  commentitia  scripta  fir- 
mare,"  Leo.  Mag.  Ep.  119  [92]),  and  other  disgraceful  artifices.  Scarcely  had  Juvenal  been 
consecrated  bishop  of  Jerusalem  when  he  proceeded  to  assert  his  claims  to  the  metropolitan 
rank  by  his  acts.     In  the  letter  of  remonstrance  against  the  proceedings  of  the  council  of 

'  Socratee:  Hut.  EccL,  ii.  24. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325  19 


Ephesus,   sent  to  Theodosius  by  the    Oriental  party,  they  complain  that  Juvenal,  whose 
"  ambitious  designs  and  juggling  tricks  "  they  are  only  too  well  acquainted  with,  had  or- 
dained in  provinces  over  which  he  had  no  jurisdiction  (Labbe,  Condi,  iii.  728).     This  auda- 
cious attempt  to  set  at  nought  the  Nicene  decrees,  and  to  falsify  both  history  and  tradition 
was  regarded  with  the  utmost  indignation  by  the  leaders  of  the  Christian  church.     Cyril  of 
Alexandria  shuddered  at  the  impious  design  ("merito  perhorrescens,"  Leo.  u.  s.),  and  wrote 
to  Leo,  then  archdeacon  of  Rome,  informing  him  of  what  Juvenal  was  undertaking,  and  beg- 
ging that  his  unlawful  attempts  might  have  no  sanction  from  the  apostolic  See  ("ut  nulla 
illicitis  conatibus  prseberetur  assensio,"  u.  s.).   Juvenal,  however,  was  far  too  useful  an  ally  in 
his  campaign  against  Nestorius  for  Cyril  lightly  to  discard.     When  the  council  met  at  Ephe- 
sus Juvenal  was  allowed,  without  the  slightest  remonstrance,  to  take  precedence  of  his  met- 
ropolitan of  Csesarea,  and  to  occupy  the  position  of  vice-president  of  the  council,  coming 
next  after  Cyril  himself  (Labbe,  Concil.  iii.  445),  and  was  regarded  in  all  respects  as  the 
second  prelate  in  the  assembly.     The  arrogant  assertion  of  his  supremacy  over  the  bishop 
of  Antioch,  and  his  claim  to  take  rank  next  after  Rome  as  an  apostolical  see,  provoked  no 
open  remonstrance,  and  his  pretensions  were  at  least  tacitly  allowed.     At  the  next  council, 
the  disgraceful  Latrocinium,  Juvenal  occupied  the  third  place,  after  Dioscorus  and  the  papal 
legate,  having  been  specially  named  by  Theodosius,  together  with  Thalassius  of  Csesarea 
(who  appears  to  have  taken  no  umbrage  at  his  suffragan  being  preferred  before  him),  as  next 
in  authority  to  Dioscorus  (Labbe,  Concil.  iv.  109),  and  he  took  a  leading  part  in  the  violent 
proceedings  of  that  assembly.     When  the  council  of  Chalcedon  met,  one  of  the  matters 
which  came  before  it  for  settlement  was  the  dispute  as  to  priority  between  Juvenal  and 
Maximus  Bishop  of  Antioch.     The  contention  was  long  and  severe.     It  ended  in  a  compro- 
mise agreed  on  in  the  Seventh  Action,  ixtrb.  iro\\r)v  <)>i\oveiKiav.     Juvenal  surrendered  his  claim 
to  the  two  Phcenicias  and  to  Arabia,  on  condition  of  his  being  allowed  metropolitical  juris- 
diction over  the  three  Palestines  (Labbe,  Concil.  iv.  613).     The  claim  to  patriarchal  author- 
ity over  the  Bishop  of  Antioch  put  forward  at  Ephesus  was  discreetly  dropped.     The  diffi- 
culty presented  by  the  Nicene  canon  does  not  appear  to  have  presented  itself  to  the  council, 
nor  was  any  one  found  to  urge  the  undoubted  claims  of  the  see  of  Caesarea.     The  terms 
arranged  between  Maximus  and  Juvenal  were  regarded  as  satisfactory,  and  received  the  con- 
sent of  the  assembled  bishops  (ibid.  618).     Maximus,  however,  was  not  long  in  repenting  of 
his  too  ready  acquiescence  in  Juvenal's  demands,  and  wrote  a  letter  of  complaint  to  pope 
Leo,  who  replied  by  the  letter  which  has  been  already  quoted,  dated  June  11,  453  a.d.,  in 
which  he  upheld  the  binding  authority  of  the  Nicene  canons,  and  commenting  in  the  strong- 
est terms  on  the  greediness  and  ambition  of  Juvenal,  who  allowed  no  opportunity  of  forward- 
ing his  ends  to  be  lost,  declared  that  as  far  as  he  was  concerned  he  would  do  all  he  could  to 
maintain  the  ancient  dignity  of  the  see  of  Antioch  (Leo  Magn.  Ep.  ad  Maximum,  119  [92]). 
No  further  action,  however,  seems  to  have  been  taken  either  by  Leo  or  by  Maximus.     Juve- 
nal was  left  master  of  the  situation,  and  the  church  of  Jerusalem  has  from  that  epoch  peace- 
ably enjoyed  the  patriarchal  dignity  obtained  for  it  by  such  base  means. 


CANON  VIII. 

Concerning  those  who  call  themselves  Cathari,  if  they  come  over  to  the  Catholic  and 
Apostolic  Church,  the  great  and  holy  Synod  decrees  that  they  who  are  ordained  shall 
continue  as  they  are  in  the  clergy.  But  it  is  before  all  things  necessary  that  they  should 
profess  in  writing  that  they  will  observe  and  follow  the  dogmas  of  the  Catholic  and  Apos- 
tolic Church ;  in  particular  that  they  will  communicate  with  persons  who  have  been 
twice  married,  and  with  those  who  having  lapsed  in  persecution  have  had  a  period  [of 

c  2 


20 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


penance]  laid  upon  them,  and  a  time  [of  restoration]  fixed  so  that  in  all  things  they  will 
follow  the  dogmas  of  the  Catholic  Church.  Wheresoever,  then,  whether  in  villages  or  in 
cities,  all  of  the  ordained  are  found  to  be  of  these  only,  let  them  remain  in  the  clergy,  and 
in  the  same  rank  in  which  they  are  found.  But  if  they  come  over  where  there  is  a  bishop 
or  presbyter  of  the  Catholic  Church,  it  is  manifest  that  the  Bishop  of  the  Church  must 
have  the  bishop's  dignity  ;  and  he  who  was  named  bishop  by  those  who  are  called  Cathari 
shall  have  the  rank  of  presbyter,  unless  it  shall  seem  fit  to  the  Bishop  to  admit  him  to 
partake  in  the  honour  of  the  title.  Or,  if  this  should  not  be  satisfactory,  then  shall  the 
bishop  provide  for  him  a  place  as  Chorepiscopus,  or  presbyter,  in  order  that  he  may  be 
evidently  seen  to  be  of  the  clergy,  and  that  there  may  not  be  two  bishops  in  the  city. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  VIII. 


If  those  called  Cathari  come  over,  let  them 
frst  make  profession  that  they  are  willing  to 
communicate  with  the  twice  married,  and  to 
grant  pardon  to  the  lapsed.  And  on  this  con- 
dition he  who  happens  to  be  in  orders,  shall 
continue  in  the  same  order,  so  that  a  bishop 
shall  still  be  bishop.  Whoever  was  a  bishop 
among  the  Cathari  let  him,  however,  become  a 
Chorepiscopus,  or  let  him  enjoy  the  honour  of  a 
presbyter  or  of  a  bishop.  For  in  one  church  there 
shall  not  be  two  bishops. 

The  Cathari  or  Novatians  were  the  follow- 
.8  of  Novatian,  a  presbyter  of  Rome,  who  had 
.een  a  Stoic  philosopher  and  was  delivered, 
according  to  his  own  story,  from  diabolical 
possession  at  his  exorcising  by  the  Church 
before  his  baptism,  when  becoming  a  Cate- 
chumen. Being  in  peril  of  death  by  illness 
he  received  clinical  baptism,  and  was  ordained 
priest  without  any  further  sacred  rites  being 
administered  to  him.  During  the  persecution 
he  constantly  refused  to  assist  his  brethren, 
and  afterwards  raised  his  voice  against  what 
he  considered  their  culpable  laxity  in  admit- 
ting to  penance  the  lapsed.  Many  agreed  with 
him  in  this,  especially  of  the  clergy,  and  event- 
ually, in  a.d.  251,  he  induced  three  bishops  to 
consecrate  him,  thus  becoming,  as  Fleury  re- 
marks,1 "  the  first  Anti-Pope."  His  indigna- 
tion was  principally  spent  upon  Pope  Corne- 
lius, and  to  overthrow  the  prevailing  discipline 
of  the  Church  he  ordained  bishops  and  sent 
them  to  different  parts  of  the  empire  as  the 
disseminators  of  his  error.  It  is  well  to  re- 
member that  while  beginning  only  as  a  schis- 
matic, he  soon  fell  into  heresy,  denying  that 
the  Church  had  the  power  to  absolve  the  lapsed. 
Although  condemned  by  several  councils  his 
sect  continued  on,  and  like  the  Montanists 
they  rebaptized  Catholics  who  apostatized  to 
them,  and  absolutely  rejected  all  second  mar- 
riages.    At  the  time  of  the  Council  of  Nice 

1  Fleury,  Hut.  Eeclei.  liv.  VL,  liij. 


the  Novatian  bishop  at  Constantinople,  Ace- 
sius,  was  greatly  esteemed,  and  although  a 
schismatic,  was  invited  to  attend  the  council. 
After  having  in  answer  to  the  emperor's  en- 
quiry whether  he  was  willing  to  sign  the 
Creed,  assured  him  that  he  was,  he  went  on 
to  explain  that  his  separation  was  because 
the  Church  no  longer  observed  the  ancient 
discipline  which  forbade  that  those  who  had 
committed  mortal  sin  should  ever  be  read- 
mitted to  communion.  According  to  the  No- 
vatians he  might  be  exhorted  to  repentance, 
but  the  Church  had  no  power  to  assure  him 
of  forgiveness  but  must  leave  him  to  the  judg- 
ment of  God.  It  was  then  that  Constantine 
said,  "Acesius,  take  a  ladder,  and  climb  up 
to  heaven  alone." 2 

Aristenus. 
If  any  of  them  be  bishops  or  chorepiscopi 
they  shall  remain  in  the  same  rank,  unless 
perchance  in  the  same  city  there  be  found  a 
bishop  of  the  Catholic  Church,  ordained  be- 
fore their  coming.  For  in  this  case  he  that 
was  properly  bishop  from  the  first  shall  have 
the  preference,  and  he  alone  shall  retain  the 
Episcopal  throne.  For  it  is  not  right  that  in 
the  same  city  there  should  be  two  bishops. 
But  he  who  by  the  Cathari  was  called  bishop, 
shall  be  honoured  as  a  presbyter,  or  (if  it  so 
please  the  bishop),  he  shall  be  sharer  of  the 
title  bishop  ;  but  he  shall  exercise  no  epis- 
copal jurisdiction. 

Zonaras,  Balsamon,  Beveridge  and  Van  Es- 
pen,  are  of  opinion  that  xilP0^irovljL^vov'i  does 
not  mean  that  they  are  to  receive  a  new  laying 
on  of  hands  at  their  reception  into  the  Church, 
but  that  it  refers  to  their  already  condition  of 
being  ordained,  the  meaning  being  that  as 
they  have  had  Novatian  ordination  they  must 
be  reckoned  among  the  clergy.  Dionysius 
Exiguus  takes  a  different  view,  as  does  also 
the  Prisca  version,  according   to   which   the 


5  Socrates,  Hist.  Eccl,  i.  10.     Vide  also  Tillemont,  Mtmoirts, 
etc.,  torn.  Ti.,  art.  17,  and  Sozoman,  H.  E.  i.  22. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


21 


clergy  of  the  Novatians  were  to  receive  a  lay- 
ing ou  of  hands,  ^etpo^fTov/xeVou?,  but  that  it 
was  not  to  be  a  reordination.  With  this  in- 
terpretation Hefele  seems  to  agree,  founding 


his  opinion  upon  the  fact  that  the  article  is 
wanting  before  x«p«3«tou/*£vovs,  and  that  avTovs 
is  added.  Gratian  '  supposes  that  this  eighth 
canon  orders  a  re-ordination. 


EXCUKSUS  ON  THE  CHOREPISCOPI. 

There  has  been  much  difference  of  opinion  among  the  learned  touching  the  status  of  the 
Chorepiscopus  in  the  early  Church.  The  main  question  in  dispute  is  as  to  whether  they 
were  always,  sometimes,  or  never,  in  episcopal  orders.  Most  Anglican  writers,  including 
Beveridge,  Hammond,  Cave,  and  Routh,  have  affirmed  the  first  proposition,  that  they  were 
true  bishops,  but  that,  out  of  respect  to  the  bishop  of  the  City  they  were  forbidden  the  exer- 
cise of  certain  of  their  episcopal  functions,  except  upon  extraordinary  occasions.  With  this 
view  Binterim 2  also  agrees,  and  Augusti  is  of  the  same  opinion.3  But  Thomassinus  is  of  a 
different  mind,  thinking,  so  says  Hefele,4  that  there  were  "  two  classes  of  chorepiscopi,  of 
whom  the  one  were  real  bishops,  while  the  other  had  only  the  title  without  consecration." 

The  third  opinion,  that  they  were  merely  presbyters,  is  espoused  by  Morinus  and  Du 
Cange,  and  others  who  are  named  by  Bingham.5  This  last  opinion  is  now  all  but  univer- 
sally rejected,  to  the  other  two  we  shall  now  devote  our  attention. 

For  the  first  opinion  no  one  can  speak  more  learnedly  nor  more  authoritatively  than 
Arthur  West  Haddon,  who  writes  as  follows  ; 

(Haddon,  Diet.  Christ.  Antiq.  s.  v.  Chorepiscopus.) 

The  chorepiscopus  was  called  into  existence  in  the  latter  part  of  the  third  century,  and 
first  in  Asia  Minor,  in  order  to  meet  the  want  of  episcopal  supervision  in  the  country  parts  of 
the  now  enlarged  dioceses  without  subdivision.  [They  are]  first  mentioned  in  the  Councils 
of  Ancyra  and  Neo-Csesarea  a.  d.  314,  and  again  in  the  Council  of  Nice  (which  is  subscribed 
by  fifteen,  all  from  Asia  Minor  or  Syria).  [They  became]  sufficiently  important  to  require  re- 
striction by  the  time  of  the  Council  of  Antioch,  a.  d.  341  ;  and  continued  to  exist  in  the 
East  until  at  least  the  ninth  century,  when  they  were  supplanted  by  Z^apxpi.  [Chorepiscopi 
are]  first  mentioned  in  the  West  in  the  Council  of  Riez,  a.  d.  439  (the  Epistles  of  Pope  Da- 
masus  I.  and  of  Leo.  M.  respecting  them  being  forgeries),  and  continued  there  (but  not  in 
Africa,  principally  in  France)  until  about  the  tenth  century,  after  which  the  name  occurs  (in 
a  decree  of  Pope  Damasus  II.  ap.  Sigeb.  in  an.  1048)  as  equivalent  to  archdeacon,  an  office 
from  which  the  Arabic  Nicene  canons  expressly  distinguish  it.  The  functions  of  chorepis- 
copi, as  well  as  their  name,  were  of  an  episcopal,  not  of  a  presbyterial  kind,  although  limited 
to  minor  offices.  They  overlooked  the  country  district  committed  to  them,  "  loco  episcopi," 
ordaining  readers,  exorcists,  subdeacons,  but,  as  a  rule,  not  deacons  or  presbyters  (and  of 
course  not  bishops),  unless  by  express  permission  of  their  diocesan  bishop.  They  confirmed 
in  their  own  districts,  and  (in  Gaul)  are  mentioned  as  consecrating  churches  (vide  Du  Cange). 
They  granted  elpcviKai,  or  letters  dimissory,  which  country  presbyters  were  forbidden  to  do. 
They  had  also  the  honorary  privilege  (nfjLwftcvoi)  of  assisting  at  the  celebration  of  the  Holy 
Eucharist  in  the  mother  city  church,  which  country  presbyters  had  not  (Cone.  Ancyr.  can. 
xiii.;  Neo-Ccesar.  can.  xiv.  ;  Antioch,  can.  x.  ;  St.  Basil  M.  Epist.  181  ;  Rab.  Maur.  Be  Instit. 
Cler.  i.  5,  etc.  etc.).  They  were  held  therefore  to  have  power  of  ordination,  but  to  lack  juris- 
diction, save  subordinately.  And  the  actual  ordination  of  a  presbyter  by  Timotheus,  a  chor- 
episcopus, is  recorded  (Pallad.,  Hist.  Lausiac.  106). 


1  Gratian,  Decretum,  Corp.  Juris   Canon,  Pars.   II.  Causa  I. 
Quaest.  7,  Can.  viij. 
1  Binterim,  Denkwiirdigkeiten,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  pp.  386-414. 


3  Augusti,  Denkwurdigkeiten.  vol.  xi.  p.  159  et  seqq. 

*  Hefele,  Hist,  of  the  Councils,  vol.  ii.  p    322. 

*  Bingham,  Antiquities,  ii.  xiv.  2,  3. 


22  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


In  the  West,  Le.  chiefly  in  Gaul,  the  order  appears  to  have  prevailed  more  widely,  to  have 
usurped  episcopal  functions  without  due  subordination  to  the  diocesans,  and  to  have  been 
also  taken  advantage  of  by  idle  or  worldly  diocesans.  In  consequence  it  seems  to  have 
aroused  a  strong  feeling  of  hostility,  which  showed  itself,  first  in  a  series  of  papal  bulls,  con- 
demning them  ;  headed,  it  is  true,  by  two  forged  letters  respectively  of  Damasus  I.  and  Leo. 
M.  (of  which  the  latter  is  merely  an  interpolated  version  of  Cone.  Hispal.  II.  a.d.  619,  can. 
7,  adding  chorepiscopi  to  presbyteri,  of  which  latter  the  council  really  treats),  but  continuing 
in  a  more  genuine  form,  from  Leo  III.  down  to  Pope  Nicholas  I.  (to  Kodolph,  Archbishop  of 
Bourges,  a.d.  864) ;  the  last  of  whom,  however,  takes  the  more  moderate  line  of  affirming 
chorepiscopi  to  be  really  bishops,  and  consequently  refusing  to  annul  their  ordinations  of 
presbyters  and  deacons  (as  previous  popes  had  done),  but  orders  them  to  keep  within  canoni- 
cal limits  ;  and  secondly,  in  a  series  of  conciliar  decrees,  Cone.  Ratispon.  a.d.  800,  in  Capit. 
lib.  iv.  c.  1,  Paris,  a.d.  829,  lib.  i.  c.  27 ;  Meld.  a.d.  845,  can.  44 ;  Metens.  a.d.  888,  can.  8,  and 
Capitul.  v.  168,  vi.  119,  vii.  187,  310,  323,  324,  annulling  all  episcopal  acts  of  chorepiscopi, 
and  ordering  them  to  be  repeated  by  "  true "  bishops  ;  and  finally  forbidding  all  further 
appointments  of  chorepiscopi  at  all. 

That  chorepiscopi  as  such — i.e.  omitting  the  cases  of  reconciled  or  vacant  bishops  above 
mentioned,  of  whose  episcopate  of  course  no  question  is  made — were  at  first  truly  bishops 
both  in  East  and  West,  appears  almost  certain,  both  from  their  name  and  functions,  and 
even  from  the  arguments  of  their  strong  opponents  just  spoken  of.  If  nothing  more  could 
be  urged  against  them,  than  that  the  Council  of  Neo-Csesarea  compared  them  to  the  Seventy 
disciples,  that  the  Council  of  Antioch  authorises  their  consecration  by  a  single  bishop,  and 
that  they  actually  were  so  consecrated  (the  Antiochene  decree  might  mean  merely  nomina- 
tion by  the  word  ylvtaSai,  but  the  actual  history  seems  to  rule  the  term  to  intend  consecra- 
tion, and  the  [one]  exceptional  case  of  a  chorepiscopus  recorded  [Actt.  Episc.  Cenovmn.  ap. 
Du  Cange]  in  late  times  to  have  been  ordained  by  three  bishops  [in  order  that  he  might  be  a 
full  bishop]  merely  proves  the  general  rule  to  the  contrary) — and  that  they  were  consecrated 
for  "villages,"  contrary  to  canon, — then  they  certainly  were  bishops.  And  Pope  Nicholas 
expressly  says  that  they  were  so.  Undoubtedly  they  ceased  to  be  so  in  the  East,  and  were 
practically  merged  in  archdeacons  in  the  West. 

For  the  second  opinion,  its  great  champion,  Thomassinus  shall  speak. 

(Thomassin,  Ancienne  et  Noavelle  Discipline  de  VEglise,  Tom.  I.  Livre  II.  chap  1.  §  iii.) 

The  chorepiscopi  were  not  duly  consecrated  bishops,  unless  some  bishop  had  consecrated 
a  bishop  for  a  town  and  the  bishop  thus  ordained  contrary  to  the  canons  was  tolerated  on 
condition  of  his  submitting  himself  to  the  diocesan  as  though  he  were  only  a  chorepiscopus. 
This  may  be  gathered  from  the  fifty-seventh  canon  of  Laodicea. 

From  this  canon  two  conclusions  may  be  drawn,  1st.  That  bishops  ought  not  to  be  or- 
dained for  villages,  and  that  as  Chorepiscopi  could  only  be  placed  in  villages  they  could  not 
be  bishops.  2d.  That  sometimes  by  accident  a  chorepiscopus  might  be  a  bishop,  but  only 
through  having  been  canonically  lowered  to  that  rank. 

The  Council  of  Nice  furnishes  another  example  of  a  bishop  lowered  to  the  rank  of  a  chor- 
episcopus in  Canon  viii.  This  canon  shows  that  they  should  not  have  been  bishops,  for  two 
bishops  could  never  be  in  a  diocese,  although  this  might  accidentally  be  the  case  when  a 
chorepiscopus  happened  to  be  a  bishop. 

This  is  the  meaning  which  must  be  given  to  the  tenth  canon  of  Antioch,  which  directs  that 
chorepiscopi,  even  if  they  have  received  episcopal  orders,  and  have  been  consecrated  bishops, 
shall  keep  within  the  limits  prescribed  by  the  canon  ;  that  in  cases  of  necessity,  they  ordain 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325  23 

the  lower  clergy  ;  but  that  they  be  careful  not  to  ordain  priests  or  deacons,  because  this 
power  is  absolutely  reserved  to  the  Diocesan.  It  must  be  added  that  as  the  council  of  Anti- 
och  commands  that  the  Diocesan  without  any  other  bishop  can  ordain  the  chorepiscopus,  the 
position  can  no  longer  be  sustained  that  the  chorepiscopi  were  bishops,  such  a  method  of 
consecrating  a  bishop  being  contrary  to  canon  xix.  of  the  same  council,  moreover  the  canon 
does  not  say  the  chorepiscopus  is  to  be  ordained,  but  uses  the  word  ytvta-Sat  by  the  bishop  of 
the  city  (canon  x.).  The  Council  of  Neocsesarea  by  referring  them  to  the  seventy  disciples 
(in  Canon  XIV.)  has  shown  the  chorepiscopi  to  be  only  priests. 

But  the  Council  of  Ancyra  does  furnish  a  difficulty,  for  the  text  seems  to  permit  chor- 
episcopi to  ordain  priests.  But  the  Greek  text  must  be  corrected  by  the  ancient  Latin  ver- 
sions. The  letter  attributed  to  pope  Nicholas,  a.d.  864,  must  be  considered  a  forgery  since 
he  recognises  the  chorepiscopi  as  real  bishops. 

If  Harmenopulus,  Aristenus,  Balsamon,  and  Zonaras  seem  to  accord  to  the  chorepiscopi 
the  power  to  ordain  priests  and  deacons  with  the  permission  of  the  Diocesan,  it  is  because 
they  are  explaining  the  meaning  and  setting  forth  the  practice  of  the  ancient  councils  and 
not  the  practice  of  their  own  times.  But  at  all  events  it  is  past  all  doubt  that  before  the 
seventh  century  there  were,  by  different  accidents,  chorepiscopi  who  were  really  bishops  and 
that  these  could,  with  the  consent  of  the  diocesan,  ordain  priests.  But  at  the  time  these  au- 
thors wrote,  there  was  not  a  single  chorepiscopus  in  the  entire  East,  as  Balsamon  frankly 
admits  in  commenting  on  Canon  xiii.  of  Ancyra. 

Whether  in  the  foregoing  the  reader  will  think  Thomassinus  has  proved  his  point,  I  do 
not  know,  but  so  far  as  the  position  of  the  chorepiscopi  in  synods  is  concerned  there  can  be 
no  doubt  whatever,  and  I  shall  allow  Hefele  to  speak  on  this  point. 

(Hefele,  History  of  the  Councils,  Vol.  I.  pp.  17,  18.) 

The  Chorepiscojri  (x^p^^kottol),  or  bishops  of  country  places,  seem  to  have  been  con- 
sidered in  ancient  times  as  quite  on  a  par  with  the  other  bishops,  as  far  as  their  position  in 
synod  was  concerned.  We  meet  with  them  at  the  Councils  of  Neocfesarea  in  the  year  314, 
of  Nicsea  in  325,  of  Ephesus  in  431.  On  the  other  hand,  among  the  600  bishops  of  the  fourth 
Ecumenical  Council  at  Chalcedon  in  451,  there  is  no  chorepiscopus  present,  for  by  this  time 
the  office  had  been  abolished  ;  but  in  the  Middle  Ages  we  again  meet  with  chorepiscopi  of  a 
new  kind  at  Western  councils,  particularly  at  those  of  the  French  Church,  at  Langres  in  830, 
at  Mayence  in  847,  at  Pontion  in  876,  at  Lyons  in  886,  at  Douzy  in  871. 

CANON  IX. 

If  any  presbyters  have  been  advanced  without  examination,  or  if  upon  examination 
they  have  made  confession  of  crime,  and  men  acting  in  violation  of  the  canon  have  laid 
hands  upon  them,  notwithstanding  their  confession,  such  the  canon  does  not  admit ;  for 
the  Catholic  Church  requires  that  [only]  which  is  blameless. 


NOTES 

Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  IX. 
Whoever  are  ordained  without  examination, 


shall  be  deposed  if  it  be  found  out  afterwards 
that  they  had  been  guilty. 

Hefele. 
The   crimes   in    question   are  those  which 


phemy,  bigamy,  heresy,  idolatry,  magic,  etc.— 
as  the  Arabic  paraphrase  of  Joseph  explains. 
It  is  clear  that  these  faults  are  punishable  in 
the  bishop  no  less  than  in  the  priest,  and  that 
consequently  our  canon  refers  to  the  bishops 
as  well  as  to  the  Trpto-fivrepot  in  the  more  re- 
stricted  sense.     These  words  of  the  Greek 


were  a  bar  to  the  priesthood — such  as  bias-   text,  "  In  the  case  in  which  any  one  might  be 


24 


1.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


induced,  in  opposition  to  the  canon,  to  ordain 
such  persons,"  allude  to  the  ninth  canon  of 
the  Synod  of  Neocaesarea.  It  was  necessary 
to  pass  such  ordinances  ;  for  even  in  the  fifth 
century,  as  the  twenty-second  letter  to  Pope 
Innocent  the  First  testifies,  some  held  that  as 
baptism  effaces  all  former  sins,  so  it  takes  away 
all  the  impedimenta  ordinationis  which  are  the 
result  of  those  sins. 


Balsamon. 
Some  say  that  as  baptism  makes  the  bap- 
tized person  a  new  man,  so  ordination  takes 
away  the  sins  committed  before  ordination, 
which  opinion  does  not  seem  to  agree  with 
the  canons. 

This  canon  occurs  twice  in  the  Corpus  Juril 
Canonici.  Decretum  Pars  I.  Dist.  xxiv.  e. 
vij.,  and  Dist.  lxxxj.,  c.  iv. 


CANON  X. 

If  any  who  have  lapsed  have  been  ordained  through  the  ignorance,  or  even  with  the 
previous  knowledge  of  the  ordainers,  this  shall  not  prejudice  the  canon  of  the  Church ; 
for  when  they  are  discovered  they  shall  be  deposed. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  X. 


Whoso  had  lapsed  are  to  be  deposed  whether 
those  who  ordained  and  promoted  them  did  so 
conscious  of  their  guilt  or  unknowing  of  it. 

Hefele. 

The  tenth  canon  differs  from  the  ninth,  in- 
asmuch as  it  concerns  only  the  lapsi  and  their 
elevation,  not  only  to  the  priesthood,  but  to 
any  other  ecclesiastical  preferment  as  well, 
and  requires  their  deposition.  The  punish- 
ment of  a  bishop  who  should  consciously  per- 
form such  an  ordination  is  not  mentioned ; 


but  it  is  incontestable  that  the  lapsi  could  not 
be  ordained,  even  after  having  performed 
penance ;  for,  as  the  preceding  canon  states, 
the  Church  requires  those  who  were  faultless. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  word  irpox<-ipi&w 
is  evidently  employed  here  in  the  sense  of 
"  ordain,"  and  is  used  without  any  distinction 
from  xetP%eiv>  whilst  in  the  synodal  letter  of 
the  Council  of  Nicoea  on  the  subject  of  the 
Meletians,  there  is  a  distinction  between  these 
two  words,  and  TrpoyzipL&iv  is  used  to  signify 
eligere. 

This  canon  is  found  in  Corpus  Juris  Canon- 
ici.    Decretum.     Pars  I.     Dist.  lxxxi.     c.  v. 


CANON  XI. 

Concerning  those  who  have  fallen  without  compulsion,  without  the  spoiling  of  their 
property,  without  danger  or  the  like,  as  happened  during  the  tyranny  of  Licinius,  the 
Synod  declares  that,  though  they  have  deserved  no  clemency,  the}7  shall  be  dealt  with 
mercifully.  As  many  as  were  communicants,  if  they  heartily  repent,  shall  pass  three 
years  among  the  hearers ;  for  seven  years  they  shall  be  prostrators  ;  and  for  two  years 
they  shall  communicate  with  the  people  in  prayers,  but  without  oblation. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XI. 


jts  many  as  fell  without  necessity,  even  if 
therefore  undeserving  of  indulgence,  yet  some 
indulgence  shall  he  shown  them  and  they  shall 
be  prostrators  for  twelve  years. 

On  the  expression  "  without  oblation " 
(x<i>pi<;  7rpcKr^>opa?)see  the  notes  to  Ancyra,  Canon 
V.  where  the  matter  is  treated  at  some  length. 


Lambert. 


The  usual  position  of  the  hearers  was  just 
inside  the  church  door.  But  Zonaras  (and 
Balsamon  agrees  with  him),  in  his  comment 
on  this  canon,  says,  "they  are  ordered  for 
three  years  to  be  hearers,  or  to  stand  without 
the  church  in  the  narthex." 

I  have  read  "as  many  as  were  communi- 
cants "  (ol  TruTToi)   thus  following  Dr.  Routh. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325  25 


Vide  his  Opuscula.     Caranza  translates  iu  Lis  j  Zonaras. 

Summary  of  the  Councils  "if  they  were  faith- 1  The  prostrators  stood  within  the  body  of 
ful "  and  seems  to  have  read  d  irurrol,  which  the  church  behind  the  ambo  [i.e.  the  reading 
is  much  simpler  and  makes  better  sense.  |  desk]  and  went  out  with  the  catechumens. 

EXCURSUS  ON  THE  PUBLIC   DISCIPLINE   OR  EXOMOLOGESIS   OF  THE 

EARLY   CHURCH. 

(Taken  chiefly  from  Morinus,  De  Disciplina  in  Administrations  Sacramenti  Pcenitentice ; 
Bingham,  Antiquities  ;  and  Hammond,  The  Definitions  of  Faith,  etc.  Note  to  Canon  XI.  of 
Nice.) 

**  In  the  Primitive  Church  there  was  a  godly  discipline,  that  at  the  beginning  of  Lent, 
such  persons  as  stood  convicted  of  notorious  sin  were  put  to  open  penance,  and  punished  in 
this  world  that  their  souls  might  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  ;  and  that  others,  admon- 
ished by  their  example,  might  be  the  more  afraid  to  offend." 

The  foregoing  words  from  the  Commination  Service  of  the  Church  of  England  may 
serve  well  to  introduce  this  subject.  In  the  history  of  the  public  administration  of  discipline 
in  the  Church,  there  are  three  periods  sufficiently  distinctly  marked.  The  first  of  these  ends 
at  the  rise  of  Novatianism  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century  ;  the  second  stretches  down 
to  about  the  eighth  century ;  and  the  third  period  shews  its  gradual  decline  to  its  practical 
abandonment  in  the  eleventh  century.  The  period  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  the  sec- 
ond, when  it  was  in  full  force. 

In  the  first  period  it  would  seem  that  public  penance  was  required  only  of  those  con- 
victed of  what  then  were  called  by  pre-eminence  "  mortal  sins "  (crimena  mortalia  1),  viz : 
idolatry,  murder,  and  adultery.  But  in  the  second  period  the  list  of  mortal  sins  was  greatly 
enlarged,  and  Morinus  says  that  "Many  Fathers  who  wrote  after  Augustine's  time,  extended 
the  necessity  of  public  penance  to  all  crimes  which  the  civil  law  punished  writh  death,  exile, 
or  other  grave  corporal  penalty."2  In  the  penitential  canons  ascribed  to  St.  Basil  and 
those  which  pass  by  the  name  of  St.  Gregory  Nyssen,  this  increase  of  offences  requiring 
public  penance  will  be  found  intimated. 

From  the  fourth  century  the  penitents  of  the  Church  were  divided  into  four  classes. 
Three  of  these  are  mentioned  in  the  eleventh  canon,  the  fourth,  which  is  not  here  referred  to, 
was  composed  of  those  styled  o-iryK/Woircs,  flentes  or  weepers.  These  were  not  allowed  to 
enter  into  the  body  of  the  church  at  all,  but  stood  or  lay  outside  the  gates,  sometimes  cov- 
ered with  sackcloth  and  ashes.  This  is  the  class  which  is  sometimes  styled  xci/ao£o/*€Voi,  hyber- 
nantes,  on  account  of  their  being  obliged  to  endure  the  inclemency  of  the  weather. 

It  may  help  to  the  better  understanding  of  this  and  other  canons  which  notice  the  differ- 
ent orders  of  penitents,  to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  usual  fonn  and  arrangement  of  the 
ancient  churches  as  well  as  of  the  diffei-ent  orders  of  the  penitents. 

Before  the  church  there  was  commonly  either  an  open  area  surrounded  with  porticoes, 
called  fjLevdvXiov  or  atrium,  with  a  font  of  water  in  the  centre,  styled  a  cantharus  or  phiala,  or 
sometimes  only  an  open  portico,  or  7rpo7rv'Xatov.  The  first  variety  may  still  be  seen  at  S.  Am- 
brogio's  in  Milan,  and  the  latter  in  Rome  at  S.  Lorenzo's,  and  in  Ravenna  at  the  two  S.  Apol- 
linares.  This  was  the  place  at  which  the  first  and  lowest  order  of  penitents,  the  weepers, 
already  referred  to,  stood  exposed  to  the  weather.  Of  these,  St.  Gregory  Thaumaturgus 
says:  "Weeping  takes  place  outside  the  door  of  the  church,  where  the  sinner  must  stand 
and  beg  the  prayers  of  the  faithful  as  they  go  in." 

The  church  itself  usually  consisted  of  three  divisions  within,  besides  these  exterior  courts 

1  Cyprian.    De  Bono  Patient.,  cap.  xir.  a  Morinus,  De  Paenitent.,  lib.  v.,  cap.  5. 


26  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


and  porch.  The  first  part  after  passing  through  "  the  great  gates,"  or  doors  of  the  building, 
was  called  the  Narthex  in  Greek,  and  Fserula  in  Latin,  and  was  a  narrow  vestibule  extending 
the  whole  width  of  the  church.  In  this  part,  to  which  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  in  most  places 
even  heretics  and  schismatics  were  admitted,  stood  the  Catechumens,  and  the  Energumens 
or  those  afflicted  with  evil  spirits,  and  the  second  class  of  penitents  (the  first  mentioned  in 
the  Canon),  who  were  called  the  dKoi/Atvoi,  audientes,  or  hearers.  These  were  allowed  to  hear 
the  Scriptures  read,  and  the  Sermon  preached,  but  were  obliged  to  depart  before  the  cele- 
bration of  the  Divine  Mysteries,  with  the  Catechumens,  and  the  others  who  went  by  the 
general  name  of  hearers  only. 

The  second  division,  or  main  body  of  the  church,  was  called  the  Naos  or  Nave.  This 
was  separated  from  the  Narthex  by  rails  of  wood,  with  gates  in  the  centre,  which  were 
called  "  the  beautiful  or  royal  gates."  In  the  middle  of  the  Nave,  but  rather  toward  the 
lower  or  entrance  part  of  it,  stood  the  Ambo,  or  reading-desk,  the  place  for  the  readers 
and  singers,  to  which  they  went  up  by  steps,  whence  the  name,  Ambo.  Before  coming  to 
the  Ambo,  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  Nave,  and  just  after  passing  the  royal  gates,  was  the 
place  for  the  third  order  of  penitents,  called  in  Greek  yoKu/cAiVovTcs,  or  ii7ro7rt7TToi/Tes,  and  in 
L;itin  Genuflectentes  or  Prostrati,  i.e.,  kneelers  or  prostrators,  because  they  were  allowed  to 
remain  and  join  in  certain  prayers  particularly  made  for  them.  Before  going  out  they  pros- 
trated themselves  to  receive  the  imposition  of  the  bishop's  hands  with  prayer.  This  class  of 
penitents  left  with  the  Catechumens. 

In  the  other  parts  of  the  Nave  stood  the  believers  or  faithful,  i.e.,  those  persons  who  were 
in  full  communion  with  the  Church,  the  men  and  women  generally  on  opposite  sides,  though 
in  some  places  the  men  were  below,  and  the  women  in  galleries  above.  Amongst  these  were 
the  fourth  class  of  penitents,  who  were  called  o-weorun-cs,  consistentes,  i.e.,  co-standers, 
because  they  were  allowed  to  stand  with  the  faithful,  and  to  remain  and  hear  the  prayers 
of  the  Church,  after  the  Catechumens  and  the  other  penitents  were  dismissed,  and  to  be 
present  while  the  faithful  offered  and  communicated,  though  they  might  not  themselves 
make  their  offerings,  nor  partake  of  the  Holy  Communion.  This  class  of  penitents  are  fre- 
quently mentioned  in  the  canons,  as  "communicating  in  prayers,"  or  "without  the  oblation  ;" 
and  it  was  the  last  grade  to  be  passed  through  previous  to  the  being  admitted  again  to  full 
communion.  The  practice  of  "  hearing  mass  "  or  "  non-communicating  attendance  "  clearly 
had  its  origin  in  this  stage  of  discipline.  At  the  upper  end  of  the  body  of  the  church,  and 
divided  from  it  by  rails  which  were  called  Cancelli,  was  that  part  which  we  now  call  the 
Chancel.  This  was  anciently  called  by  several  names,  as  Bema  or  tribunal,  from  its  being 
raised  above  the  body  of  the  church,  and  Sacrarium  or  Sanctuary.  It  was  also  called  Apsis 
and  Concha  Bematis,  from  its  semicircular  end.  In  this  part  stood  the  Altar,  or  Hohr  Table 
(which  names  were  indifferently  vised  in  the  primitive  Church),  behind  which,  and  against 
the  wall  of  the  chancel,  was  the  Bishop's  throne,  with  the  seats  of  the  Presbyters  on  each 
side  of  it,  called  synthronus.  On  one  side  of  the  chancel  was  the  repository  for  the  sacred 
utensils  and  vestments,  called  the  Diaconicum,  and  answering  to  our  Vestry  ;  and  on  the 
other  the  Prothesis,  a  side-table,  or  place,  where  the  bread  and  wine  were  deposited  before 
they  were  offered  on  the  Altar.  The  gates  in  the  chancel  rail  wei*e  called  the  holy  gates, 
and  none  but  the  higher  orders  of  the  clergy,  i.e.,  Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons,  were  allowed 
to  enter  within  them.  The  Emperor  indeed  was  permitted  to  do  so  for  the  purpose  of  mak- 
ing his  offering  at  the  Altar,  but  then  he  was  obliged  to  retire  immediately,  and  to  receive 
the  communion  without. 

(Thoimissiii.  Aneienne  et  Nouvelle  Discipline  de  VEglise.  Tom.  I.  Livre  II.  chap.  xvj. 
somewhat  abridged.) 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325  27 


In  the  West  there  existed  always  many  cases  of  public  penance,  but  in  the  East  it  is  more 
difficult  to  find  any  traces  of  it,  after  it  was  abolished  by  the  Patriarch  Nectarius  in  the  per- 
son of  the  Grand  Penitentiary. 

However,  the  Emperor  Alexis  Comnenus,  who  took  the  empire  in  the  year  1080,  did  a 
penance  like  that  of  older  days,  and  one  which  may  well  pass  for  miraculous.  He  called 
together  a  large  number  of  bishops  with  the  patriarch,  and  some  holy  religious ;  he  pre- 
sented himself  before  them  in  the  garb  of  a  criminal ;  he  confessed  to  them  his  crime  of 
usurpation  with  all  its  circumstances.  They  condemned  the  Emperor  and  all  his  accomplices 
to  fasting,  to  lying  prostrate  upon  the  earth,  to  wearing  haircloth,  and  to  all  the  other  ordi- 
nary austerities  of  penance.  Their  wives  desired  to  share  their  griefs  and  their  sufferings, 
although  they  had  had  no  share  in  their  crime.  The  whole  palace  became  a  theatre  of  sor- 
row and  public  penance.  The  emperor  wore  the  hairshirt  under  the  purple,  and  lay  upon 
the  earth  for  forty  days,  having  only  a  stone  for  a  pillow. 

To  all  practical  purposes  Public  Penance  was  a  general  institution  but  for  a  short  while 
in  the  Church.  But  the  reader  must  be  careful  to  distinguish  between  this  Public  Penance 
and  the  private  confession  which  in  the  Catholic  Church  both  East  and  West  is  universally 
practised.  What  Nectarivis  did  was  to  abolish  the  office  of  Penitentiary,  whose  duty  it 
had  been  to  assign  public  penance  for  secret  sin  ; l  a  thing  wholly  different  from  what  Catho- 
lics understand  by  the  "  Sacrament  of  Penance."  It  would  be  out  of  place  to  do  more  in 
this  place  than  to  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  bare  fact,  and  to  supply  him,  from  a 
Roman  Catholic  point  of  view,  with  an  explanation  of  why  Public  Penance  died  out.  "  It  came 
to  an  end  because  it  was  of  human  institution.  But  sacramental  confession,  being  of  divine 
origin,  lasted  when  the  penitential  discipline  had  been  changed,  and  continues  to  this  day 
among  the  Greeks  and  Oriental  sects. " 2  That  the  reader  may  judge  of  the  absolute  can- 
dour of  the  writer  just  quoted,  I  give  a  few  sentences  from  the  same  article  :  "  An  opinion, 
however,  did  prevail  to  some  extent  in  the  middle  ages,  even  among  Catholics,  that  confes- 
sion to  God  alone  sufficed.  The  Council  of  Chalons  in  813  (canon  xxxiij.),  says:  'Some 
assert  that  we  should  confess  our  sins  to  God  alone,  but  some  think  that  they  should  be 
confessed  to  the  priest,  each  of  which  practices  is  followed  not  without  great  fruit  in  Holy 
Church.  .  .  .  Confession  made  to  God  purges  sins,  but  that  made  to  the  priest  teaches 
how  they  are  to  be  purged.'  This  former  opinion  is  also  mentioned  without  reprobation  by 
Peter  Lombard  {In  Sentent.  Lib.  iv.  dist.  xvij.)." 

CANON  XII. 

As  many  as  were  called  by  grace,  and  displayed  the  first  zeal,  having  cast  aside  their 
military  girdles,  but  afterwards  returned,  like  clogs,  to  their  own  vomit,  (so  that  some 
spent  money  and  by  means  of  gifts  regained  their  military  stations)  ;  let  these,  after 
they  have  passed  the  space  of  three  years  as  hearers,  be  for  ten  years  prostrators.  But 
in  all  these  cases  it  is  necessary  to  examine  well  into  their  purpose  and  what  their 
repentance  appears  to  be  like.  For  as  many  as  give  evidence  of  their  conversions  by 
deeds,  and  not  pretence,  with  fear,  and  tears,  and  perseverance,  and  good  works,  when 
they  have  fulfilled  their  appointed  time  as  hearers,  may  properly  communicate  in 
prayers  ;  and  after  that  the  bishop  may  determine  yet  more  favourably  concerning 
them.  But  those  who  take  [the  matter]  with  indifference,  and  who  think  the  form  of 
[not]  entering  the  Church  is  sufficient  for  their  conversion,  must  fulfil  the  whole  time. 

■Vide,  ThomssBin.     Lib.  eit.  Livre  II.  Chapitre  vii.  %  xiii.  I     'Addis  and  Arnold.     A  Catholic  Dictionary;  tub  voce  Pen- 
where  the  whole  matter  of  Nectarius's  action  ia  discussed.  1  ance.  Sacrament  of. 


28 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XII. 


Those  who  endured  violence  and  were  seen  to 
have  resisted,  but  xoho  afterwards  yielded  to 
wickedness,  and  returned  to  the  army,  shall  be 
excommunicated  for  ten  years.  But  in  every 
case  the  way  in  which  they  do  their  penance 
must  be  scrutinized.  And  if  anyone  who  is  do- 
ing penance  shews  himself  zealous  in  its  per- 
formance, the  bishop  shall  treat  him  more  leni- 
ently than  had  he  been  cold  and  indifferent. 

Lambert. 

The  abuse  of  this  power,  namely,  of  grant- 
ing under  certain  circumstances  a  relaxation 
in  the  penitential  exercises  enjoined  by  the 
canons — led,  in  later  times,  to  the  practice  of 
commuting  such  exercises  for  money  pay- 
ments, etc. 

Hefele. 

In  his  last  contests  with  Constantine,  Li- 
cinius  had  made  himself  the  representative 
of  heathenism  ;  so  that  the  final  issue  of  the 
war  would  not  be  the  mere  triumph  of  one  of 
the  two  competitors,  but  the  triumph  or  fall 
of  Christianity  or  heathenism.  Accordingly, 
a  Christian  who  had  in  this  war  supported  the 
cause  of  Licinius  and  of  heathenism  might  be 
considered  as  a  lapsus,  even  if  he  did  not  for- 
mally fall  away.  With  much  more  reason 
might  those  Christians  be  treated  as  lapsi 
who,  having  conscientiously  given  up  military 
service  (this  is  meant  by  the  soldier's  belt), 
afterwards  retracted  their  resolution,  and 
went  so  far  as  to  give  money  and  presents  for 
the  sake  of  readmission,  on  account  of  the  nu- 
merous advantages  which  military  service  then 
affoi'ded.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Li- 
cinius, as  Zonaras  and  Eusebius  relate,  re- 
quired from  his  soldiers  a  formal  apostasy  ; 
compelled  them,  for  example,  to  take  part  in 
the  heathen  sacrifices  which  were  held  in  the 
camps,  and  dismissed  from  his  service  those 
who  would  not  apostatize. 

Bright. 

This  canon  (which  in  the  Prisca  and  the 
Isidorian  version  stands  as  part  of  canon  11) 
deals,  like  it,  with  cases  which  had  arisen  un- 
der the  Eastern  reign  of  Licinius,  who  having 
resolved  to  "  purge  his  army  of  all  ardent 
Christians"  (Mason,  Persec.  of  Diocl.  p.  308), 
ordered  his  Christian  officers  to  sacrifice  to 
the  gods  on  pain  of  being  cashiered  (compare 
Euseb.  H.  Ex.8;   Vit.  Con.  I  54).     It  is  to 


be  observed  here  that  military  life  as  such  was 
not  deemed  unchristian.  The  case  of  Corne- 
lius was  borne  in  mind.  "We  serve  in  your 
armies,  "  says  Tertullian,  Apol.  42  (although 
later,  as  a  Montanist,  he  took  a  rigorist  and 
fanatical  view,  De  Cor.  11),  and  compare  the 
fact  which  underlies  the  tale  of  the  "Thun- 
dering Legion," — the  presence  of  Christians 
in  the  army  of  Marcus  Aurelius.  It  was  the 
heathenish  adjuncts  to  their  calling  which 
often  brought  Christian  soldiers  to  a  stand  (see 
Routh.  Scr.  Opusc.  i.  410),  as  when  Marinus' 
succession  to  a  centurionship  was  challenged 
on  the  ground  that  he  could  not  sacrifice  to 
the  gods  (Euseb.  H.  E.  vii.  15).  Sometimes, 
indeed,  individual  Christians  thought  like 
Maximilian  in  the  Martyrology,  who  absolutely 
refused  to  enlist,  and  on  being  told  by  the 
proconsul  that  there  were  Christian  soldiers 
in  the  imperial  service,  answered,  "  Ipsi  sciunt ' 
quod  ipsis  expediat "  (Ruinart,  Act.  Sane.  p.  ' 
341).  But,  says  Bingham  (Antiq.  xi.  5,  10), 
"  the  ancient  canons  did  not  condemn  the  mil- 
itary life  as  a  vocation  simply  unlawful.  .  .  . 
I  believe  there  is  no  instance  of  any  man  being 
refused  baptism  merely  because  he  was  a  sol- 
dier, unless  some  unlawful  circumstance,  such 
as  idolatry,  or  the  like,  made  the  vocation  sin- 
ful." After  the  victory  of  Constantine  in  the 
West,  the  Council  of  Aries  excommunicated 
those  who  in  time  of  peace  "  threw  away  their 
arms  "  (can.  2).  In  the  case  before  us,  some 
Christian  officers  had  at  first  stood  firm  under 
the  trial  imposed  on  them  by  Licinius.  They 
had  been  "  called  by  grace  "  to  an  act  of  self- 
sacrifice  (the  phrase  is  one  which  St.  Augus- 
tine might  have  used) ;  and  had  shown  "  their 
eagerness  at  the  outset  "  ("  primum  suum  ar- 
dorem,"  Dionysius  ;  Philoand  Evarestus  more 
laxly,  "primordia  bona  ;  "  compare  rrji  jyinrrjv 
aov  rrjv  irpwTrjv,  Rev.  ii.  4).  Observe  here  how 
beautifully  the  ideas  of  grace  and  free  will  are 
harmonized.  These  men  had  responded  to  a 
Divine  impulse  :  it  might  seem  that  they  had 
committed  themselves  to  a  noble  course  :  they 
had  cast  aside  the  "  belts  "  which  were  their 
badge  of  office  (compare  the  cases  of  Valen- 
tinian  and  Valens,  Soc.  iii.  13,  and  of  Benevo- 
lus  throwing  down  his  belt  at  the  feet  of  Jus- 
tina,  Soz.  vii.  13).  They  had  done,  in  fact, 
just  what  Auxentius,  one  of  Licinius'  notaries, 
had  done  when,  according  to  the  graphic  anec- 
dote of  Philostorgius  (Fragm.  5),  his  master 
bade  him  place  a  bunch  of  grapes  befon  a 
statue  of  Bacchus  in  the  palace-court ;  but 
their  zeal,  unlike  his,  proved  to  be  too  impul- 
sive— they  reconsidered  their   position,  and 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


29 


illustrated  the  maxim  that  in  morals  second 
thoughts  are  not  best  (Butler,  Serm.  7),  by 
making  unworthy  attempts — in  some  cases 
by  bribery — to  recover  what  they  had  worth- 
ily resigned.  (Observe  the  Grecised  Latinism  j 
(3ci'e<t>iKioi<;  and  compare  the  Latinisms  of  St. 
Mark,  and  others  in  Euseb.  iii.  20,  vi.  40,  x. 
5.)  This  the  Council  describes  in  proverbial 
language,  probably  borrowed  from  2  Pet.  ii. 
22,  but,  it  is  needless  to  say,  without  intend- 
ing to  censure  enlistment  as  such.  They 
now  desired  to  be  received  to  penance  :  ac- 
cordingly they  were  ordered  to  spend  three 
years  as  Hearers,  during  which  time  "  their 
purpose,  and  the  nature  (etSos)  of  their  re- 
pentance "  were  to  be  carefully  "examined." 
Again  we  see  the  earnest  resolution  of  the 
Council  to  make  discipline  a  moral  reality, 
and  to  prevent  it  from  being  turned  into  a 
formal  routine  ;  to  secure,  as  Rufinus'  abridg- 
ment expresses  it,  a  repentance  "  fructuosam 
et  attentam."  If  the  penitents  were  found  to  I 
have  "  manifested  their  conversion  by  deeds, ' 
and  not  in  outward  show  (oxijpm),  by  awe,  and  ; 
tears,  and  patience,  and  good  works"  (such, 
for  instance,  Zonaras  comments,  as  almsgiving  j 
according  to  ability),  "  it  would  be  then  rea- 
sonable to  admit  them  to  a  participation  in 
the  prayers,"  to  the  position  of  Consistentes, 
"  with  permission  also  to  the  bishop  to  come 
to  a  yet  more  indulgent  resolution  concerning 
them,"  by  admitting  them  to  full  communion. 
This  discretionary  power  of  the  bishop  to  dis- 
pense with  part  of  a  penance-time  is  recog- 
nized in  the  fifth  canon  of  Ancyra  and  the  six- 
teenth of  Chalcedon,  and  mentioned  by  Basil, 


Epist.  217,  c.  74.  It  was  the  basis  of  "  indul- 
gences "  in  their  original  form  (Bingham,  xviii. 
4,  9).  But  it  was  too  possible  that  some  at 
least  of  these  "  lapsi  "  might  take  the  whole 
affair  lightly,  "  with  indifference  "  aSia<p6p<ixi~ 
not  seriously  enough,  as  Hervetas  renders- 
just  as  if,  in  common  parlance,  it  did  not  sig- 
nify :  the  fourth  Ancyrene  canon  speaks  of 
lapsi  who  partook  of  the  idol-feast  a8ia<f>6p<Ds 
as  if  it  involved  them  in  no  sin  (see  below  on 
Eph.  5,  Chalc.  4).  It  was  possible  that  they 
might  "  deem  "  the  outward  form  of  "  entering 
the  church  "  to  stand  in  the  narthex  among 
the  Hearers  (here,  as  in  c.  8,  19,  cr^/xa  de- 
notes an  external  visible  fact)  sufficient  to  en- 
title them  to  the  character  of  converted  peni- 
tents, while  their  conduct  out  of  church  was 
utterly  lacking  in  seriousness  and  self-humili- 
ation. In  that  case  there  could  be  no  ques- 
tion of  shortening  their  penance-  time,  for  they 
were  not  in  a  state  to  benefit  by  indulgence : 
it  would  be,  as  the  Roman  Presbyters  wrote  to 
Cyprian,  and  as  he  himself  wrote  to  his  own 
church,  a  "  mere  covering  over  of  the  wound" 
(Ep>ist.  30,  3),  an  "injury"  rather  than  "a  kind- 
ness  "  (Be  Lapsis,  13)  ;  they  must  therefore 
"by  all  means  "  go  through  ten  years  as  Kneel- 
ers,  before  they  can  become  Consistentes. 

There  is  great  difficulty  about  the  last 
phrase  and  Gelasius  of  Cyzicus,  the  Prisca, 
Dionysius  Exiguus,  the  pseudo-Isidore,  Zo- 
naras and  most  others  have  considered  the 
"  not "  an  interpolation.  I  do  not  see  how 
dropping  the  "  not "  makes  the  meaning  mate- 
rially clearer 


canon  xni, 

Concerning  the  departing,  the  ancient  canonical  law  is  still  to  be  maintained,  to  wit, 
that,  if  any  man  be  at  the  point  of  death,  lie  must  not  be  deprived  of  the  last  and  most 
indispensable  Viaticum.  But,  if  any  one  should  be  restored  to  health  again  who  has  re* 
ceived  the  communion  when  his  life  was  despaired  of,  let  him  remain  among  those  who 
communicate  in  prayers  only.  But  in  general,  and  in  the  case  of  any  dying  person 
whatsoever  asking  to  receive  the  Eucharist,  let  the  Bishop,  after  examination  made,  give 
it  him. 

iMOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  op  Canon  fiJlL 

The  dying  are  to  be  communicated.  But  if 
any  such  get  well,  he  must  be  placed  in  the  num- 
ber of  those  who  share  in  the  prayers,  and  with 
these  only. 

Van  Espehv- 

It  cannot  be  denied  thawtfifiqnityused  the 
name  "Viaticum  "  not  only  to£?note  the  Eu- 
charist which  was  given  to  the  dymfe   out  also 


to  denote  the  reconciliation,  and  imposition 
of  penance,  and  in  general,  everything  that 
could  be  conducive  to  the  happy  death  of  the 
person  concerned,  and  this  has  been  shown 
by  Aubespine  (lib.  1,  Obs.  cap.  ii. ).  But  while 
this  is  so,  the  more  usual  sense  of  the  word  is 
the  Eucharist.  For  this  cannot  be  denied 
that  the  faithful  of  the  first  ages  of  the  Church 
looked  upon  the  Eucharist  as  the  complement 
of  Christian  perfection,  and  as  the  last  seal  of 


30  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


hope  and  salvation.  It  was  for  this  reason  |  Balsamon  and  Zonaras  also  understand  the 
that  at  the  beginning  of  life,  after  baptism  !  canon  as  I  have  done,  as  is  evident  from  their 
and  confirmation,  the  Eucharist  was  given  commentaries,  and  so  did  JosephusiEgyptius, 
even  to  infants,  and  at  the  close  of  life  the  who  in  his  Arabic  Paraphrase  gives  the  canon 
Eucharist  followed  reconciliation  and  extreme  this  title  :  "  Concerning  him  who  is  excom- 
unction,  so  that  properly  and  literally  it  could  j  municated  and  has  committed  some  deadly 
be  styled  "the  last  Viaticum."     Moreover  for  sin,  and  desires  the  Eucharist  to  be  granted 


penitents  it  was  considered  especially  neces 
sary  that  through  it  they  might  return  to  the 
peace  of  the  Church  ;  for  perfect  peace  is 
given  by  that  very  communion  of  the  Eucha- 
rist. [A  number  of  instances  are  then  cited, 
and  various  ancient  versions  of  the  canon.] 


to  him." 

This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici,  Gratian,  Decretum  Pars.  II.  causa 
xxvi,  Quaes.  VI.,  c.  ix. 


EXCURSUS  ON  THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  SICK 

There  is  nothing  upon  which  the  ancient  church  more  strenuously  insisted  than  the  oral 
reception  of  the  Holy  Communion.  What  in  later  times  was  known  as  "  Spiritual  Commun- 
ion "  was  outside  of  the  view  of  those  early  days ;  and  to  them  the  issues  of  eternity  were 
considered  often  to  rest  upon  the  sick  man's  receiving  with  his  mouth  "  his  food  for  the  jour- 
ney," the  Viaticum,  before  he  died.  No  greater  proof  of  how  important  this  matter  was 
deemed  could  be  found  than  the  present  canon,  which  provides  that  even  the  stern  and  in- 
variable canons  of  the  public  penance  are  to  give  way  before  the  awful  necessity  of  fortifying 
the  soul  in  the  last  hour  of  its  earthly  sojourn. 

Possibly  at  first  the  holy  Sacrament  may  have  been  consecrated  in  the  presence  of  the  sick 
person,  but  of  this  in  early  times  the  instances  are  rare  and  by  no  means  clear.  In  fact  it 
was  considered  a  marked  favour  that  such  a  thing  should  be  allowed,  and  the  saying  of  mass 
in  private  houses  was  prohibited  (as  it  is  in  the  Eastern  and  Latin  churches  still  to-day)  with 
the  greatest  rigour. 

The  necessity  of  having  the  consecrated  bread  and  wine  for  the  sick  led  to  their  reserva- 
tion, a  practice  which  has  existed  in  the  Church  from  the  very  beginning,  so  far  as  any  records 
of  which  we  are  in  possession  shew. 

St.  Justin  Martyr,  writing  less  than  a  half  century  after  St.  John's  death,  mentions  that 
"the  deacons  communicate  each  of  those  present,  and  carry  away  to  the  absent  the  blest 
bread,  and  wine  and  water."  l     It  was  evidently  a  long  established  custom  in  his  day. 

Tertullian  tells  us  of  a  woman  whose  husband  was  a  heathen  and  who  was  allowed  to 
keep  the  Holy  Sacrament  in  her  house  that  she  might  receive  every  morning  before  other 
food.  St.  Cyprian  also  gives  a  most  interesting  example  of  reservation.  In  his  treatise  "  On 
the  Lapsed  "  written  in  a.d.  251,  (chapter  xxvi),  he  says  :  "  Another  woman,  when  she  tried 
with  unworthy  hands  to  open  her  box,  in  which  was  the  Holy  of  the  Lord,  was  deterred  from 
daring  to  touch  it  by  fire  rising  from  it." 

It  is  impossible  with  any  accuracy  to  fix  the  date,  but  certainly  before  the  year  four  hun- 
dred, a  perpetual  reservation  for  the  sick  was  made  in  the  churches.  A  most  interesting  in- 
cidental proof  of  this  is  found  in  the  thrilling  description  given  by  St.  Chrysostom  of  the 
gr<;it  riot  in  Constantinople  in  the  year  403,  when  the  soldiers  "burst  into  the  place  where 
the  Holy  Things  were  stored,  and  saw  all  things  therein,"  and  "  the  most  holy  blood  of  Christ 
was  spilled  upon  their  clothes." 2  From  this  incident  it  is  evident  that  in  that  church  the 
Holy  Sacrament  was  reserved  in  both  kinds,  and  separately. 

Whether  this  at  the  time  was  usual  it  is  hard  to  say,  but  there  can  b  e  no  doubt  that 
even  in  the  earliest  times  the  Sacrament  was  given,  on  rare  occasions  at  least,  in  one  kind, 

1  Just  M.  Apol.  I.  cap.  Ixt.  *  Ctaryfl.  Ep.  ad  Innoc.  Sec.  3. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


31 


sometimes  under  the  form  of  bread  alone,  and  when  the  sick  persons  could  not  swallow  under 
the  form  of  wine  alone.  The  practice  called  "  intinction,"  that  is  the  dipping  of  the  bread 
into  the  wine  and  administering  the  two  species  together,  was  of  very  early  introduction  and 
still  is  universal  in  the  East,  not  only  when  Communion  is  given  with  the  reserved  Sacra- 
ment, but  also  when  the  people  are  communicated  in  the  Liturgy  from  the  newly  consecrated 
species.  The  first  mention  of  intinction  in  the  West,  is  at  Carthage  in  the  fifth  century.1  We 
know  it  was  practised  in  the  seventh  century  and  by  the  twelfth  it  had  become  general,  to  give 
place  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  chalice  altogether  in  the  West.*  "Regino  (De  Eccles.  Discip. 
Lib.  I.  c.  lxx.)  in  906,  Burchard  (Deer.  Lib.  V.  cap.  ix.  fol.  95.  colon.  1560.)  in  996,  and  Ivo 
(Deer.  Pars.  II.  cap.  xix.  p.  56,  Paris  1617)  in  1092  all  cite  a  Canon,  which  they  ascribe  to  a 
council  of  Tours  ordering '  every  presbyter  to  have  a  pyx  or  vessel  meet  for  so  great  a  sacra- 
ment, in  which  the  Body  of  the  Lord  may  be  carefully  laid  up  for  the  Viaticum  to  those  de- 
parting from  this  world,  which  sacred  oblation  ought  to  be  steeped  in  the  Blood  of  Christ 
that  the  presbyter  may  be  able  to  say  truthfully  to  the  sick  man,  The  Body  and  Blood  of  the 
Lord  avail  thee,  etc'  " 3 

The  reservation  of  the  Holy  Sacrament  was  usually  made  in  the  church  itself,  and  the 
learned  W.  E.  Scudamore  is  of  opinion  that  this  was  the  case  in  Africa  as  early  as  the  fourth 
century.4 

It  will  not  be  uninteresting  to  quote  in  this  connection  the  "  Apostolic  Constitutions," 
for  while  indeed  there  is  much  doubt  of  the  date  of  the  Eighth  Book,  yet  it  is  certainly  of 
great  antiquity.  Here  we  read,  "  and  after  the  communion  of  both  men  and  women,  the 
deacons  take  what  remains  and  place  it  in  the  tabernacle."5 

Perhaps  it  may  not  be  amiss  before  closing  the  remark  that  so  far  as  we  are  aware  the 
reservation  of  the  Holy  Sacrament  in  the  early  church  was  only  for  the  puiposes  of  com- 
munion, and  that  the  churches  of  the  East  reserve  it  to  the  present  day  only  for  this  purpose. 

Those  who  wish  to  read  the  matter  treated  of  more  at  length,  can  do  so  in  Muratorius's 
learned  "Dissertations  "  which  are  prefixed  to  his  edition  of  the  Roman  Sacramentaries  (chap- 
ter XXIV)  and  in  Scudamore's  Notitia  Eueharistica,  a  work  which  can  be  absolutely  relied 
upon  for  the  accuracy  of  its  facts,  however  little  one  may  feel  constrained  to  accept  the  logi- 
cal justness  of  its  conclusions. 


CANON  XIV. 

Concerning  catechumens  who  have  lapsed,  the  holy  and  great  Synod  has  decreed 
that,  after  they  have  passed  three  years  only  as  hearers,  they  shall  pray  with  the  cate- 
chumens. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XIV. 


If  any  of  the  catechumens  shall  have  fallen 
for  three  years  he  shall  be  a  hearer  only,  and 
then  let  him  pray  with  the  catechumens. 

JuSTELLTJS. 

The  people  formerly  were  divided  into  three 
classes  in  the  church,  for  there  were  catechu- 

1 1  give  the  reference  as  in  Scudamore's  Xot.  Euch.  from  whicn    the  Book  of  Maccabees  in  this  sense  ;  but  its  classical  use  is  to 
I  have  taken  it.    De  Prom,  et  Freed.  Dei;  Dimid.  Temp.  c.  6;    signify  the  shrine  of  a  god,  and  while  so  distinguished  a  writer 


mens,  faithful,  and  penitents  ;  but  it  is  clear 
from  the  present  canon  there  were  two  kinds 
of  catechumens  :  one  consisting  of  those  who 
heard  the  Word  of  God,  and  wished  to  become 
Christians,  but  had  not  yet  desired  baptism  ; 
these  were  called  "  hearers.''  Others  who  were 
of  long  standing,  and  were  properly  trained 
in  the  faith,  and  desired  baptism — these  were 
called  "  competentes." 


inter  Opp.  Prosperi,  p.  161.  ed.  1609 

a  Cf.  Scndamore.  Not.  Euch.  p.  705. 

3  Scudamore.  Notit.  Erich,  p.  707. 

*  W.  E.  Scudamore.  Notitia  Eueharistica  [2d.  Ed  ]  p.  1025. 

6  Apont.  Const.  Lib.  viii.  cap.  xiij.    The  word  used  is  woo-to- 
4>opta,  this  may  possibly  mean  a  side  chapel,  and  does  occur  in 


as  Pierre  Le  Brun  adopts  the  later  meaning,  the  no  less  famous 
Durant,  together  with  most  commentators,  translate  as  I  have 
done  above.  In  either  case  for  the  present  purpose,  the  quotation 
is  conclusive  of  the  practice  of  the  primitive  church  in  regard  to 
this  matter.  Liddell  and  Scott  give  "  na<iTo<t>6pos .  one  carrying 
the  image  of  a  god  in  a  shrine." 


32 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


There  is  difference  of  opinion  among  the 
learned  as  to  whether  there  was  not  a  third  or 
even  a  fourth  class  of  catechumens.  Bing- 
ham and  Card.  Bona,  while  not  agreeing  in 
particular  points,  agree  in  affirming  that  there 
were  more  than  two  classes.  Bingham's  first 
class  are  those  not  allowed  to  enter  the  church, 
the  efaSov/Atvoi,  but  the  affirmation  of  the  ex- 
istence of  such  a  class  rests  only  on  a  very 
forced  explanation  of  canon  five  of  Neocaes- 
area.  The  second  class,  the  hearers,  audi- 
entes,  rests  on  better  evidence.  These  were 
not  allowed  to  stay  while  the  Holy  Mysteries 
were  celebrated,  and  their  expulsion  gave  rise 
to  the  distinction  between  the  "  Mass  of  the 
Catechumens  "  (3Essa  Catechumenorum)  and 
the  "  Mass  of  the  Faithful "  (Missa  Fidelium). 
Nor  were  they  suffered  to  hear  the  Creed  or 
the  Our  Father.  Writers  who  multiply  the 
classes  insert  here  some  who  knelt  and  prayed, 
called  Prostrati  or  Genuflectentes  (the  same 
name  as  was  given  to  one  of  the  grades  of 
penitence). 

(Edw.  H.  Plumptre  in  Diet.  Christ.  Antiq. 
s.  v.  Catechumens.) 

After  these  stages  had  been  traversed  each 
with  its  appropriate  instruction,  the  catechu- 
mens gave  in  their  names  as  applicants  for 
baptism,  and  were  known  accordingly  as  Com- 
petentes  {awaiTovvris).  This  was  done  com- 
monly at  the  beginning  of  the  Quadragesimal 
fast,  and  the  instruction,  carried  on  through 
the  whole  of  that  period,  was  fuller  and  more 
public  in  its  nature  (Cyril  Hieros.  Catech.  i. 
5  ;  Hieron.  Ep.  61,  ad  Pammach.  c.  4).  To 
catechumens  in  this  stage  the  great  articles  of 
the  Creed,  the  nature  of  the  Sacraments,  the 


penitential  discipline  of  the  Church,  were  ex- 
plained, as  in   the   Catechetical  Lectures  of 
Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  with  dogmatic  precision. 
Special  examinations  and  inquiries  into  char- 
acter were  made  at  intervals  during  the  forty 
days.     It  was  a  time  for  fasting  and  watching 
and  prayer  ( Constt.  Apost.  viii.  5  ;  4  C.  Garth. 
c.  85  ;  Tertull.  BeBapt.  c.  20;  Cyril.  1.  c.)  and, 
in  the  case  of  those  who  were  married,  of  the 
strictest  continence  (August.  De  fide  et  oper. 
v.  8).     Those  who  passed  through  the  ordeal 
were  known  as  the  perfectiores  (reXeioyrcpot)  the 
electi,  or  in  the  nomenclature  of  the  Eastern 
Church  as  /3a7rn£o/A£voi  or  <£wti£o/a£voi,  the  pres- 
ent participle  being  used  of  course  with  a  fut- 
ure or  gerundial  sense.     Their  names  were 
inscribed  as  such  in  the  album  or  register  of 
the  church.     They  were  taught,  but  not  till  a 
few  days  before  their  baptism,  the  Creed  and 
the  Lord's  Prayer  which  they  were  to  use  after 
it.     The  periods  for  this  registration  varied, 
naturally  enough,  in  different  churches.     At 
Jerusalem  it  was  done  on  the  second  (Cyril. 
Catech.  iii),  in  Africa  on  the  fourth  Sunday  in 
Lent  (August.  Serm.  213),  and  this  was  the 
time  at  which  the  candidate,  if  so  disposed, 
might  lay  aside  his  old  heathen  or  Jewish 
name  and  take  one  more  specifically  Christian 
(Socrat.  H.  E.  vii.  21).     .     .     .     It  is  only  nec- 
essary to  notice  here  that  the  Sacramentum 
Catechumenorum  of  which  Augustine  speaks 
{De  Peccat.  Merit,  ii.  26)  as  given  apparently 
at  or  about  the  time  of  their  first  admission 
by  imposition   of  hands,  was   probably   the 
tvXoyiai  or  panis  benedictus,  and  not,  as  Bing- 
ham and  Angusti  maintain,  the  salt  which  was 
given  with  milk  and  honey  after  baptism. 


CANON  XV. 

On  account  ot  the  great  disturbance  and  discords  that  occur,  it  is  decreed  that  the 
custom  prevailing  in  certain  places  contrary  to  the  Canon,  must  wholly  be  done  away ; 
so  that  neither  bishop,  presbyter,  nor  deacon  shall  pass  from  city  to  city.  And  if  any 
one,  after  this  decree  of  the  holy  and  great  Synod,  shall  attempt  any  such  thing,  or  con- 
tinue in  any  such  course,  his  proceedings  shall  be  utterly  void,  and  he  shall  be  restored 
to  the  Church  for  which  he  was  ordained  bishop  or  presbyter. 

NOTES. 

Ancient  Epitome  op  Canon  XV.  I  been    forbidden    in    the    primitive   Church. 

Neither  bishop,  presbyter,  nor  deacon  shall   Nevertheless,  several  translations  had  taken 

pass  from  city  to  city.     Put  they  shall  be  sent  ;  p!ace>  and  even  at  tne  Council  of  Nice  several 

back,  should  they  attempt  to  do  so,  to  the  Churches   eminent  men  were  present  who  had  left  their 

in  which  they  were  ordained.  first  bishoprics  to  take  others  :  thus  Eusebius, 

Bishop  of  Nicomedia,  had  been  before  Bishop 


Hefele 
The  translation  of  a  bishop,  priest,  or  dea 


of   Berytus  ;   Eustathius,  Bishop  of  Antioch, 
had  been  before  Bishop  of  Berrhcea  in  Syria. 


con  from  one  church  to  another,  had  already   The  Council  of  Nice  thought  it  necessary  to 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


33 


forbid  in  future  these  translations,  and  to  de- 
clare them  invalid.  The  chief  reason  of  this 
prohibition  was  found  in  the  irregularities 
and  disputes  occasioned  by  such  change  of  i 
sees  ;  but  even  if  such  practical  difficulties 
had  not  arisen,  the  whole  doctrinal  idea,  so 
to  speak,  of  the  relationship  between  a  cleric 
and  the  church  to  which  he  had  been  or- 
dained, namely,  the  contracting  of  a  mystical 
marriage  between  them,  would  be  opposed  to 
any  translation  or  change.  In  341  the  Synod 
of  Antioch  renewed,  in  its  twenty-first  canon, 
the  prohibition  passed  by  the  Council  of  Nice  ; 
but  the  interest  of  the  Church  often  rendered 
it  necessary  to  make  exceptions,  as  happened 


in  the  case  of  St.  Chrysostom.  These  excep- 
tional cases  increased  almost  immediately 
after  the  holding  of  the  Council  of  Nice,  so 
that  in  382,  St.  Gregory  of  Nazianzum  con- 
sidered this  law  among  those  which  had  long 
been  abrogated  by  custom.  It  was  more 
strictly  observed  in  the  Latin  Church  ;  and 
even  Gregory's  contemporary,  Pope  Damasus, 
declared  himself  decidedly  in  favour  of  the 
rule  of  Nice. 

This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici.  Becretum,  Pars  II.  Causa  VII,  Q.  1, 
c.  xix. 


EXCURSUS  ON  THE  TRANSLATION   OF  BISHOPS. 

There  are  few  points  upon  which  the  discipline  of  the  Church  has  so  completely  changed 
as  that  which  regulated,  or  rather  which  forbade,  the  translation  of  a  bishop  from  the  see  for 
which  he  was  consecrated  to  some  other  diocese.  The  grounds  on  which  such  prohibition 
rested  were  usually  that  such  changes  were  the  outcome  of  ambition,  and  that  if  tolerated 
the  result  would  be  that  smaller  and  less  important  sees  would  be  despised,  and  that  there 
would  be  a  constant  temptation  to  the  bishops  of  such  sees  to  make  themselves  popular  with 
the  important  persons  in  other  dioceses  with  the  hope  of  promotion.  Besides  this  objection 
to  translation,  St.  Athanasius  mentions  a  spiritual  one,  that  the  diocese  was  the  bishop's 
bride,  and  that  to  desert  it  and  take  another  was  an  act  of  unjustifiable  divorce,  and  subse- 
quent adultery.1  Canon  XIV.  of  the  Apostolic  Canons  does  not  forbid  the  practice  abso- 
lutely, but  allows  it  for  just  cause,  and  although  the  Council  of  Nice  is  more  stringent  so 
far  as  its  words  are  concerned,  apparently  forbidding  translation  under  any  circumstances, 
yet,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  very  council  did  allow  and  approve  a  translation.2  The  general 
feeling,  however,  of  the  early  Church  was  certainly  very  strong  against  all  such  changes  of 
Episcopal  cure,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  chief  reason  why  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen 
resigned  the  Presidency  of  the  First  Council  of  Constantinople,  was  because  he  had  been 
translated  from  his  obscure  see  Sasima  (not  Nazianzum  as  Socrates  and  Jerome  say)  to  the 
Imperial  City.3 

From  the  canons  of  some  provincial  councils,  and  especially  from  those  of  the  Third  and 
of  the  Fourth  Council  of  Carthage,  it  is  evident  that  despite  the  conciliar  and  papal  pro- 
hibitions, translations  did  take  place,  being  made  by  the  authority  of  the  provincial  Synods, 
and  without  the  consent  of  the  pope,4  but  it  is  also  evident  that  this  authority  was  too  weak, 
and  that  the  aid  of  the  secular  power  had  often  to  be  invoked. 

This  course,  of  having  the  matter  decided  by  the  synod,  was  exactly  in  accordance  with 
the  Apostolic  Canon  (no.  xiv.).  In  this  manner,  for  example,  Alexander  was  translated  from 
Cappadocia  to  Jerusalem,  a  translation  made,  so  it  is  narrated,  in  obedience  to  heavenly 
revelation. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  Nicene  Canon  does  not  forbid  Provincial  Councils  to  translate 


1  Athanas.  Apol.  ij. 

a  Sozom.     H.  E.  I.  2. 

3  By  no  one  has  this  whole  matter  of  the  translation  of  bishops 
been  more  caref  ully  and  thoroughly  treated  than  by  Thomassinus, 
and  in  what  follows  I  shall  use  his  discussion  as  a  thesaurus  of 
facts.  The  title  of  his  book  is  Ancicnne  et  Nouvelle  Discipline 
de  VEijhse  (There  is  also  an  edition  in  Latin).  In  the  Third  Part, 
and  the  Second  Book, 

Chapter  LX.  treats  of  "  Translations  of  bishops  in  the  Latin 
Church  during  the  first  five  centuries." 

VOL.  XIV.  D 


Chapter  LXI.  "Translations  in  the  Eastern  Church,  during 
the  first  five  centuries." 

Chapter  LXII.  "Translation  of  bishops  and  bishoprics  be- 
tween the  years  five  hundred  and  eight  hundred." 

Chapter  LXIII.  'Translation  under  the  empire  of  Charle- 
magne and  his  descendants. " 

Chapter  LXIV.  "Translation  of  bishops  after  the  year  one 
thousand." 

Of  all  this  I  can  in  the  text  give  but  a  brief  resume. 

*  Thomassin.  I.  c.  lx.  viij. 


34  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


bishops,  but  forbids  bishops  to  translate  themselves,  and  the  author  of  the  tract  De  Transla- 
tionibus  in  the  Jus  Orient,  (i.  293,  Git.  Haddon.  Art.  "Bishop,"  Smith  and  Cheetham,  Diet. 
Chr.  Antiq.)  sums  up  the  matter  tersely  in  the  statement  that  rj  /x€Ta/3aais  kckwAvtcu,  ov  p-^v  y 
fi€Ta^€ais  :  Le.,  the  thing  prohibited  is  "  transmigration  "  (which  arises  from  the  bishop  himself, 
from  selfish  motives)  not  "  translation  "  (wherein  the  will  of  God  and  the  good  of  the  Church 
is  the  ruling  cause) ;  the  "  going,"  not  the  "  being  taken  "  to  another  see.  And  this  was  the 
practice  both  of  East  and  West,  for  many  centuries.  Roman  Catholic  writers  have  tried  to 
prove  that  translations,  at  least  to  the  chief  sees,  required  the  papal  consent,  but  Thomas- 
sinus,  considering  the  case  of  St.  Meletius  having  translated  St.  Gregory  of  Nazianzum  to 
Constantinople,  admits  that  in  so  doing  he  "  would  only  have  followed  the  example  of  many 
great  bishops  of  the  first  ages,  when  usage  had  not  yet  reserved  translations  to  the  first  see 
of  the  Church.  "  » 

But  the  same  learned  author  frankly  confesses  that  in  France,  Spain,  and  England,  trans- 
lations were  made  until  the  ninth  century  without  consulting  the  pope  at  all,  by  bishops  and 
kings.  When,  however,  from  grounds  of  simple  ambition,  Anthimus  was  translated  from 
Trebizonde  to  Constantinople,  the  religious  of  the  city  wrote  to  the  pope,  as  also  did  the 
patriarchs  of  Antioch  and  Jerusalem,  and  as  a  result  the  Emperor  Justinian  allowed  Anthi- 
mus to  be  deposed.2 

Balsamon  distinguishes  three  kinds  of  translations.  The  first,  when  a  bishop  of  marked 
learning  and  of  equal  piety  is  forced  by  a  council  to  pass  from  a  small  diocese  to  one  far 
greater  where  he  will  be  able  to  do  the  Church  the  most  important  services,  as  was  the  case 
when  St.  Gregory  of  Nazianzum  was  transferred  from  Sasima  to  Constantinople,  fjuTadtais ; 
the  second  when  a  bishop,  whose  see  has  been  laid  low  by  the  barbarians,  is  transferred  to 
another  see  which  is  vacant,  /xt-ra/Wis  ;  and  the  third  when  a  bishop,  either  having  or  lacking 
a  see,  seizes  on  a  bishopric  which  is  vacant,  on  his  own  proper  authority  dva/?ao-is.  And  it  is 
this  last  which  the  Council  of  Sardica  punishes  so  severely.  In  all  these  remarks  of  Balsa- 
mon there  is  no  mention  of  the  imperial  power. 

Demetrius  Chomatenus,  however,  who  was  Archbishop  of  Thessalonica,  and  wrote  a 
series  of  answers  to  Cabasilas,  Archbishop  of  Durazzo,  says  that  by  the  command  of  the 
Emperor  a  bishop,  elected  and  confirmed,  and  even  ready  to  be  ordained  for  a  diocese,  may 
be  forced  to  take  the  charge  of  another  one  which  is  more  important,  and  where  his  services 
will  be  incomparably  more  useful  to  the  public.  Thus  we  read  in  the  Book  of  Eastern  Law 
that  "If  a  Metropolitan  with  his  synod,  moved  by  a  praiseworthy  cause  and  probable  pre- 
text, shall  give  his  approbation  to  the  translation  of  a  bishop,  this  can,  without  doubt,  be 
done,  for  the  good  of  souls  and  for  the  better  administration  of  the  church's  affairs,  etc.  "3 
This  was  adopted  at  a  synod  held  by  the  patriarch  Manuel  at  Constantinople,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  imperial  commissioners. 

The  same  thing  appears  also  in  the  synodal  response  of  the  patriarch  Michael,  which 
only  demands  for  translation  the  authority  of  the  Metropolitan  and  "the  greatest  authority 
of  the  Church."4  But,  soon  after  this,  translation  became  the  rule,  and  not  the  exception 
both  in  East  and  West. 

It  was  in  vain  that  Simeon,  Archbishop  of  Thessalonica,  in  the  East  raised  his  voice  against 
the  constant  translations  made  by  the  secular  power,  and  the  Emperors  of  Constantinople 
were  often  absolute  masters  of  the  choice  and  translations  of  bishops  ;  and  Thomassinus 
sums  up  the  matter,  "At  the  least  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  no  translations  could 


'  Thomassin.  I.  cit..  Chap.  LI.,  §  xiij. 

a  Thin  is  ThomassiniiB's  version  of  the  matter,  in  fact  the 
charpe  of  heresy  was  also  made  apainst  Anthimus,  bat  hit  anca- 
nonical  translation  was  a  real  count  in  the  accusation. 


*Jurix.  Orient,  torn.  I.  p  240,  241. 

*  Ibid.  p.  6.    I  am  not  at  all  clear  as  to  what  this  last  phrase 
means. 


y 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


35 


be  made  without  the  consent  of  the  Emperor,  especially  when  it  was  the  See  of  Constantino- 
ple that  was  to  be  filled." 

The  same  learned  writer  continues :  "  It  was  usually  the  bishop  or  archbishop  of  another 
church  that  was  chosen  to  ascend  the  patriarchal  throne  of  the  imperial  city.  The  Kings 
of  England  often  used  this  same  power  to  appoint  to  the  Primatial  See  of  Canterbury  a 
bishop  already  approved  in  the  government  of  another  diocese."  ' 

In  the  West,  Cardinal  Bellarmine  disapproved  the  prevailing  custom  of  translations  and 
protested  against  it  to  his  master,  Pope  Clement  VIII.,  reminding  him  that  they  were  con- 
trary to  the  canons  and  contrary  to  the  usage  of  the  Ancient  Church,  except  in  cases  of 
necessity  and  of  great  gain  to  the  Church.  The  pope  entirely  agreed  with  these  wise  obser- 
vations, and  promised  that  he  would  himself  make,  and  would  urge  princes  to  make,  transla- 
tions only  "  with  difficulty."  But  translations  are  made  universally,  all  the  world  over,  to-day, 
and  no  attention  whatever  is  paid  to  the  ancient  canons  and  discipline  of  the  Church.2 


CANON  XVI. 

Neither  presbyters,  nor  deacons,  nor  any  others  enrolled  among  the  clergy,  who, 
not  having  the  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes,  nor  regarding  the  ecclesiastical  Canon, 
shall  recklessly  remove  from  their  own  church,  ought  by  any  means  to  be  received  by 
another  church  ;  but  every  constraint  should  be  applied  to  restore  them  to  their  own 
parishes ;  and,  if  they  will  not  go,  they  must  be  excommunicated.  And  if  anyone  shall 
dare  surreptitiously  to  carry  off  and  in  his  own  Church  ordain  a  man  belonging  to 
another,  without  the  consent  of  his  own  proper  bishop,  from  whom  although  he  was 
enrolled  in  the  clergy  list  he  has  seceded,  let  the  ordination  be  void. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XVI. 


this  place,  and  not  that  they  should  not  enter 
the  church  nor  receive  the  sacraments.  This 
decree  agrees  with  canon  xv.  of  the  Apos- 
tolical canons,  which  provides  that  such  shall 
not  celebrate  the  liturgy.  Canon  xvj.  of  the 
same  Apostolical  canons  further  provides  that 
if  a  bishop  receive  a  cleric  coming  to  him 
from  another  diocese  without  his  bishop's  let- 
ters dimissory,  and  shall  ordain  him,  such  a 
bishop  shall  be  separated.  From  all  this  it  is 
evident  that  the  Chartophylax  of  the  Great 
Church  for  the  time  does  rightly  in  refusing 
to  allow  priests  ordained  in  other  dioceses  to 
offer  the  sacrifice  unless  thej'  bring  with  them 
letters  commendatory  and  dimissory  from 
those  who  ordained  them. 

Zonaras  had  also  in  his  Scholion  given  the 
same  explanation  of  the  canon. 

This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juiis 
Canonici,  divided  into  two.  Decretum.  Pars 
II,  Causa  VII.  Qusest.  I.  c.  xxiij.  ;  and  Pars 
I.  Dist.  LXXI.,  c.  iij. 

1  Thomassin.  lib  cit.,  chap.  LXIV.  §  x. 

1  I  believe  this  is  true  of  all  churches.  Catholic  and  Protestant,  exception  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States, 

having  an  episcopal  form  of  government  (including  the  Protestant  in  which  the  ancient  prohibition  of  the  translation  of  diocesan 

Church  of  Sweden,  and  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church),  with  the  bishops  is  observed  in  all  its  Nicene  strictness. 

D  2 


Such  presbyters  or  deacons  as  desert  their 
own  Church  are  not  to  be  admitted,  into  another, 
but  are  to  be  sent  back  to  their  own  diocese. 
But  if  any  bishop  should  ordain  one  who  be- 
longs to  another  Church  without  the  consent  of 
his  own  bishop,  the  ordination  shall  be  can- 1 
celled. 

"  Parish  "  in  this  canon,  as  so  often  else- 
where, means  "  diocese." 

Balsamon. 

It  seemed  right  that  the  clergy  should  have 
no  power  to  move  from  city  to  city  and  to 
change  their  canonical  residence  without  let- ! 
ters  dimissory  from  the  bishop  who  ordained 
them.  But  such  clerics  as  are  called  by  the 
bishops  who  ordained  them  and  cannot  be 
persuaded  to  return,  are  to  be  separated  from  ; 
communion,  that  is  to  say,  not  to  be  allowed 
to  concelebrate  (avvupovpyecv)  with  them,  for 
this  is  the  meaning  of  "  excommunicated  "  in 


36  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


CANON  XVII. 

Forasmuch  as  many  enrolled  among  the  Clergy,  following  covetousness  and  lust  of 
gain,  have  forgotten  the  divine  Scripture,  which  says,  "  He  hath  not  given  his  money 
upon  usury,"  and  in  lending  money  ask  the  hundredth  of  the  sum  [as  monthly  interest], 
the  holy  and  great  Synod  thinks  it  just  that  if  after  this  decree  any  one  be  found  to 
receive  usury,  whether  he  accomplish  it  by  secret  transaction  or  otherwise,  as  by  de- 
manding the  whole  and  one  half,  or  by  using  any  other  contrivance  whatever  for  filthy 
lucre's  sake,  he  shall  be  deposed  from  the  clergy  and  his  name  stricken  from  the  list. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XVII. 


If  anyone  shall  receive  usury  or  150  per 
cent,  he  shall  be  cast  forth  and  deposed,  accord- 
ing to  this  decree  of  the  Church. 

Van  Espen. 

Although  the  canon  expresses  only  these  two 
species  of  usury,  if  we  bear  in  mind  the 
grounds  on  which  the  prohibition  was  made, 


canon  sent  by  the  Orientals  to  the  Sixth  Coun- 
cil of  Carthage  is  in  no  respect  alien  to  the 
true  intent  of  the  canon  ;  for  in  this  version 
no  mention  is  made  of  any  particular  kind  of 
usury,  but  generally  the  penalty  is  assigned 
to  any  clerics  who  "  shall  be  found  after  this 
decree  taking  usury "  or  thinking  out  any 
other  scheme  for  the  sake  of  filthy  lucre. 

This  Canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici,  in  the  first  part  of  the  Decretum,  in 


it  will  be  manifest  that  every  kind  of  usury  is  Dionysius's  version.  Dist.  xlvii,  c.  ii,  and 
forbidden  to  clerics  and  under  any  circum-  again  in  Isidore's  version  in  Pars  II,  Causa 
stances,  and  therefore  the  translation  of  this  xiv.  Quses.  iv.,  c.  viii. 

EXCUKSUS   ON   USUKY. 

The  famous  canonist  Van  Espen  defines  usury  thus  :  "  Usura  definitur  lucrum  ex  mutuo 
exactum  aut  speratum  ;"1  and  then  goes  on  to  defend  the  proposition  that,  "Usury  is  for- 
bidden by  natural,  by  divine,  and  by  human  law.  The  first  is  proved  thus.  Natural  law,  as 
far  as  its  first  principles  are  concerned,  is  contained  in  the  decalogue  ;  but  usury  is  prohibit- 
ed in  the  decalogue,  inasmuch  as  theft  is  prohibited ;  and  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  Master 
of  the  Sentences,  of  St.  Bonaventura,  of  St.  Thomas  and  of  a  host  of  others  :  for  by  the 
name  of  theft  in  the  Law  all  unlawful  taking  of  another's  goods  is  prohibited  ;  but  usury  is 
an  unlawful,  etc."  For  a  proof  of  usury's  being  contrary  to  divine  law  he  cites  Ex.  xxii.  25, 
and  Deut.  xxiii.  29;  and  from  the  New  Testament  Luke  vi.  34.  "The  third  assertion  is 
proved  thus.  Usury  is  forbidden  by  human  law  :  The  First  Council  of  Nice  in  Canon  VII. 
deposed  from  the  clergy  and  from  all  ecclesiastical  rank,  clerics  who  took  usury  ;  and  the 
same  thing  is  the  case  with  an  infinite  number  of  councils,  in  fact  with  nearly  all  e.  g.  Elvira, 
ij,  Aries  j,  Carthage  iij,  Tours  iij,  etc.  Nay,  even  the  pagans  themselves  formerly  forbid  it 
by  their  laws."  He  then  quotes  Tacitus  (Annal.  lib.  v.),  and  adds,  "with  what  severe  laws 
tli"  French  Kings  coerced  usurers  is  evident  from  the  edicts  of  St.  Louis,  Philip  IV.,  Charles 
IX.,  Henry  III.,  etc." 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Van  Espen  in  the  foregoing  has  accurately  represented  and 
without  any  exaggeration  the  universal  opinion  of  all  teachers  of  morals,  theologians,  doctors, 
Popes,  and  Councils  of  the  Christian  Church  for  the  first  fifteen  hundred  years.  All  interest 
exacted  upon  loans  of  money  was  looked  upon  as  usury,  and  its  reception  was  esteemed  a 
form  of  theft  and  dishonesty.  Those  who  wish  to  read  the  history  of  the  matter  in  all  its  de- 
tails are  referred  to  Bossuet's  work  on  the  subject,  Traite  de  I'Usure,2  where  they  will  find 

1  Van  Espen.  Dissertatio  de  Usura,  Art.  1.  »  Boseuet.  CEuvres  Comp.  xxij. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325  37 


the  old,  traditional  view  of  the  Christian  religion  defended  by  one  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  all  that  could  be  said  on  the  other  side. 

The  glory  of  inventing  the  new  moral  code  on  the  subject,  by  which  that  which  before  was 
looked  upon  as  mortal  sin  has  been  transfigured  into  innocence,  if  not  virtue,  belongs  to 
John  Calvin  !  He  made  the  modern  distinction  between  "interest"  and  "usury,"  and  was 
the  first  to  write  in  defence  of  this  then  new-fangled  refinement  of  casuistry.1  Luther 
violently  opposed  him,  and  Melancthon  also  kept  to  the  old  doctrine,  though  less  violently 
(as  was  to  be  expected)  ;  to-day  the  whole  Christian  West,  Protestant  and  Catholic  alike,  stake 
their  salvation  upon  the  truth  of  Calvin's  distinction  !  Among  Roman  Catholics  the  new 
doctrine  began  to  be  defended  about  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  work  of 
Scipio  Maffei,  Bell'  impiego  dell  danaro,  written  on  the  laxer  side,  having  attracted  a  wide- 
spread attention.  The  Ballerini  affirm  that  the  learned  pope  Benedict  XIV.  allowed  books 
defending  the  new  morals  to  be  dedicated  to  him,  and  in  1830  the  Congregation  of  the  Holy 
Office  with  the  approval  of  the  reigning  Pontiff,  Pius  VIII.,  decided  that  those  who  considered 
the  taking  of  interest  allowed  by  the  state  law  justifiable,  were  "not  to  be  disturbed."  It  is 
entirely  disingenuous  to  attempt  to  reconcile  the  modern  with  the  ancient  doctrine  ;  the 
Fathers  expressly  deny  that  the  State  has  any  power  to  make  the  receiving  of  interest  just  or 
to  fix  its  rate,  there  is  but  one  ground  for  those  to  take  who  accept  the  new  teaching,  viz. 
that  all  the  ancients,  while  true  on  the  moral  principle  that  one  must  not  defraud  his  neigh- 
bour nor  take  unjust  advantage  of  his  necessity,  were  in  error  concerning  the  facts,  in  that 
they  supposed  that  money  was  barren,  an  opinion  which  the  Schoolmen  also  held,  following 
Aristotle.  This  we  have  found  in  modern  times,  and  amid  modern  circumstances,  to  be  an 
entire  error,  as  Gury,  the  famous  modern  casuist,  well  says,  "fructum  producitet  multiplica- 
tur  per  se." 2 

That  the  student  may  have  it  in  his  power  to  read  the  Patristic  view  of  the  matter,  I  give 
a,  list  of  the  passages  most  commonly  cited,  together  with  a  review  of  the  conciliar  action,  for 
all  which  I  am  indebted  to  a  masterly  article  by  Wharton  B.  Marriott  in  Smith  and  Cheet- 
ham's  Dictionary  of  Christian  Antiquities  (s.  v.  Usury). 

Although  the  conditions  of  the  mercantile  community  in  the  East  and  the  West  differed 
materially  in  some  respects,  the  fathers  of  the  two  churches  are  equally  explicit  and  system- 
atic in  their  condemnation  of  the  practice  of  usury.  Among  those  belonging  to  the  Greek 
church  we  find  Athanasius  (Expos,  in  Ps.  xiv) ;  Basil  the  Great  (Horn,  in  Ps.  xiv).  Gregory  of 
Nazianzuni  (Orat.  xiv.  in  Patrem  tacentem).  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (Oral.  cont.  Usurarios) ;  Cyril  of 
Jerusalem  (Catech.  iv.  c.  37),  Epiphanius  (adv.  Haeres.  Epilog,  c.  24),  Chrysostom  (Horn.  xli. 
in  Genes),  and  Theodoret  (Interpr.  in  Ps.  xiv.  5,  and  liv.  11).  Among  those  belonging  to  the 
Latin  church,  Hilary  of  Poitiers  (in  Ps.  xiv);  Ambrose  (de  Tobia  liber  unus).  Jerome  (in  Ezech. 
vi.  18) ;  Augustine  de  Baptismo  contr.  Donatistas,  iv.  19);  Leo  the  Great  (Epist.  iii.  4),  and  Cas- 
siodorus  (in  Ps.  xiv.  10). 

The  canons  of  later  councils  differ  materially  in  relation  to  this  subject,  and  indicate  a 
distinct  tendency  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  the  Nicsean  interdict.  That  of  the  council  of 
Carthage  of  the  year  348  enforces  the  original  prohibition,  but  without  the  penalty,  and 
grounds  the  veto  on  both  Old  and  New  Testament  authority,  "  nemo  contra  prophetas,  nemo 
contra  evangelia  facit  sine  periculo"  (Mansi,  iii.  158).  The  language,  however,  when  com- 
pared with  that  of  the  council  of  Carthage  of  the  year  419,  serves  to  suggest  that,  in  the  inter- 
val, the  lower  clergy  had  occasionally  been  found  having  recourse  to  the  forbidden  practice, 
for  the  general  terms  of  the  earlier  canon,  "  ut  non  liceat  clericis  fenerari,"  are  enforced  with 

1  Funk  {Zins  v/nd  Wurher.  p.  104)  Pays  that  Eck  and  Hoog-  I      2  Gury,  Comp.  Theol.  Moral  (Ed.  Ballerini)  vol.  ii.  p.  611. 
etriiten  had  already  verbally  defended  this  distinction  at  Bologna.   | 


38  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


greater  particularity  in  the  latter,  "  Nee  omnino  cuiquam  clericorum  liceat  de  qualibet  re 
foenus  accipere  "  (Mansi,  iv.  423).  This  supposition  is  supported  by  the  language  of  the 
council  of  Orleans  (a.d.  538),  which  appears  to  imply  that  deacons  were  not  prohibited 
from  lending  money  at  interest,  "Et  clericus  adiaconatu,  et  supra,  pecuniam  noncommodet 
ad  usuras  "  (ib.  ix.  18).  Similarly,  at  the  second  council  of  Trullanum  (a.d.  692)  a  like 
liberty  would  appear  to  have  been  recognised  among  the  lower  clergy  (Hardouin,  hi.  1663). 
While,  again,  the  Nicsean  canon  requires  the  immediate  deposition  of  the  ecclesiastic  found 
guilty  of  the  practice,  the  Apostolical  canon  enjoins  that  such  deposition  is  to  take  place 
only  after  he  has  been  admonished  and  has  disregarded  the  admonition. 

Generally  speaking,  the  evidence  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Church  imposed  no 
penalty  on  the  layman.  St.  Basil  (Epist.  clxxxviii.  can.  12),  says  that  a  usurer  may  even  be 
admitted  to  orders,  provided  he  gives  his  acquired  wealth  to  the  poor  and  abstains  for  the 
future  from  the  pursuit  of  gain  (Migne,  Patrol.  Grose,  xxxii.  275).  Gregory  of  Nyssa  says 
that  usury,  unlike  theft,  the  desecration  of  tombs,  and  sacrilege  (lepo<rv\ia),  is  allowed  to  pass 
unpunished,  although  among  the  things  forbidden  by  Scripture,  nor  is  a  candidate  at  ordina- 
tion ever  asked  whether  or  no  he  has  been  guilty  of  the  practice  (Migne,  ib.  xlv.  233).  A 
letter  of  Sidonius  Apollinaris  (Epist.  vi.  24)  relating  an  experience  of  his  friend  Maximus, 
appears  to  imply  that  no  blame  attached  to  lending  money  at  the  legal  rate  of  interest,  and 
that  even  a  bishop  might  be  a  creditor  on  those  terms.  We  find  also  Desideratus,  bishop  of 
Verdun,  when  applying  for  a  loan  to  king  Theodebert,  for  the  relief  of  his  impoverished  dio- 
cese, promising  repayment,  "  cum  usuris  legitimis,"  an  expression  which  would  seem  to  imply 
that  in  the  Gallican  church  usury  was  recognised  as  lawful  under  certain  conditions  (Greg. 
Tur.  Hist.  Franc,  iii.  34).  So  again  a  letter  (Epist.  ix.  38)  of  Gregory  the  Great  seems  to 
shew  that  he  did  not  regard  the  payment  of  interest  for  money  advanced  by  one  layman  to 
another  as  unlawful.  But  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  in  what  is  known  as  archbishop  Theo- 
dore's "Penitential"  (circ.  a.d.  690)  what  appears  to  be  a  general  law  on  the  subject,  en- 
joining "  Sie  quis  usuras  undecunque  exegerit  .  .  .  tres  annos  in  pane  et  aqua  "  (c.  xxv. 
3) ;  a  penance  again  enjoined  in  the  Penitential  of  Egbert  of  York  (c.  ii.  30).  In  like  manner, 
the  legates,  George  and  Theophylact,  in  reporting  their  proceedings  in  England  to  pope 
Adrian  I.  (a.d.  787),  state  that  they  have  prohibited  "usurers,"  and  cite  the  authority  of  the 
Psalmist  and  St.  Augustine  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Cone.  iii.  457).  The  councils  of  Mayence, 
Rheims,  and  Chalons,  in  the  year  813,  and  that  of  Aix  in  the  year  816,  seem  to  have  laid  down 
the  same  prohibition  as  binding  both  on  the  clergy  and  the  laity  (Hardouin,  Cone.  iv.  1011, 
1020,  1033,  1100). 

Muratori,  in  his  dissertation  on  the  subject  (Antichitd,  vol.  i.),  observes  that  "we  do  not 
know  exactly  how  commerce  was  transacted  in  the  five  preceding  centuries,"  and  conse- 
quently are  ignorant  as  to  the  terms  on  which  loans  of  money  were  effected. 

CANON  XVIII. 

It  has  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  and  great  Synod  that,  in  some  districts 
and  cities,  the  deacons  administer  the  Eucharist  to  the  presbyters,  whereas  neither 
canon  nor  custom  permits  that  they  who  have  no  right  to  offer  should  give  the  Body  of 
Christ  to  them  that  do  offer.  And  this  also  has  been  made  known,  that  certain  deacons 
now  touch  the  Eucharist  even  before  the  bishops.  Let  all  such  practices  be  utterly  done 
away,  and  let  the  deacons  remain  within  their  own  bounds,  knowing  that  they  are  the 
ministers  of  the  bishop  and  the  inferiors  of  the  presbyters.  Let  them  receive  the 
Eucharist  according  to  their  order,  after  the  presbyters,  and  let  either  the  bishop  or  the 
presbyter  administer  to  them.  Furthermore,  let  not  the  deacons  sit  among  the  presby- 
ters, for  that  is  contrary  to  canon  and  order.  And  if,  after  this  decree,  any  one  shall 
refuse  to  obey,  let  him  be  deposed  from  the  diaconate. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


39 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XVIII. 

Deacons  must  abide  within  their  own  bounds. 
They  shall  not  administer  the  Eucharist  to 
presbyters,  nor  touch  it  before  them,  nor  sit 
among  the  presbyters.  For  all  this  is  contrary 
to  canon,  and  to  decent  order. 

Van  Espen. 


NOTES. 

fixed  tradition  that  there  was  a  sacrifice  in 
which  the  body  of  Christ  was  offered.  Thirdly 
that  not  to  all,  nor  even  to  deacons,  but  only 
to  bishops  and  presbyters  was  given  the  power 
of  offering.  And  lastly,  that  there  was  recog- 
nized a  fixed  hierarchy  in  the  Church,  made 
up  of  bishops  and  presbyters  and  deacons  in 
subordination  to  these. 


Four  excesses  of  deacons  this  canon  con- 
demns, at  least  indirectly.  The  first  was  that 
they  gave  the  holy  Communion  to  presbyters. 
To  understand  more  easily  the  meaning  of  the 
canon  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  refer- 
ence here  is  not  to  the  presbyters  who  were 
sacrificing  at  the  altar  but  to  those  who  were 
offering  together  with  the  bishop  who  was 
sacrificing ;  by  a  rite  not  unlike  that  which 
to-day  takes  place,  when  the  newly  ordained 
presbyters  or  bishops  celebrate  mass  with  the 
ordaining  bishop  ;  and  this  rite  in  old  times 
was  of  daily  occurrence,  for  a  full  account  of 
which  see  Morinus  De  SS.  Ordinal.  P.  III. 
Exercit.  viij.  .  .  .  The  present  canon 
does  not  take  away  from  deacons  the  author- 
ity to  distribute  the  Eucharist  to  laymen,  or 
to  the  minor  clergy,  but  only  reproves  their 
insolence  and  audacity  in  presuming  to  ad- 
minister to  presbyters  who  were  concelebrat- 
ing  with  the   bishop  or  another   presbyter. 

The  second  abuse  was  that  certain  deacons 
touched  the  sacred  gifts  before  the  bishop. 
The  vulgar  version  of  Isidore  reads  for 
"  touched  "  "  received,"  a  meaning  which  Bal- 
samon  and  Zonaras  also  adopt,  and  unless  the 
Greek  word,  which  signifies  "  to  touch,"  is  con- 
trary to  this  translation,  it  seems  by  no  means 
to  be  alien  to  the  context  of  the  canon. 

"Let  them  receive  the  Eucharist  according 
to  their  order,  after  the  presbyters,  and  let  the 
bishop  or  the  presbyter  administer  to  them." 
In  these  words  it  is  implied  that  some  deacons 
had  presumed  to  receive  Holy  Communion  be- 
fore the  presbyters,  and  this  is  the  third  excess 
of  the  deacon  which  is  condemned  by  the  Synod. 

And  lastly,  the  fourth  excess  was  that  they 
took  a  place  among  the  presbyters  at  the  very 
time  of  the  sacrifice,  or  "  at  the  holy  altar,"  as 
Balsamon  observes. 

From  this  canon  we  see  that  the  Nicene 
fathers  entertained  no  doubt  that  the  faithful 
in  the  holy  Communion  truly  received  "  the 
body  of  Christ."  Secondly,  that  that  was 
"  offered  "  in  the  church,  which  is  the  word 
by  which  sacrifice  is  designated  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  therefore  it  was  at  that  time  a 


Of  course  even  at  that  early  date  there  was 
nothing  new  in  this  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist. 
St.  Ignatius  more  than  a  century  and  a  half 
before,  wrote  as  follows :  "  But  mark  ye  those 
who  hold  strange  doctrine  touching  the  grace 
of  Jesus  Christ  which  came  to  us,  how  that 
they  are  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God.  They 
have  no  care  for  love,  none  for  the  widow, 
none  for  the  orphan,  none  for  the  afflicted, 
none  for  the  prisoner,  none  for  the  hungry 
or  thirsty.  They  abstain  from  eucharist 
(thanksgiving)  and  prayer,  because  they  al- 
low not  that  the  Eucharist  is  the  flesh  of  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  which  flesh  suffered  for 
our  sins,  and  which  the  Father  of  his  good- 
ness raised  up."  l 

In  one  point  the  learned  scholiast  just 
quoted  has  most  seriously  understated  his 
case.  He  says  that  the  wording  of  the  canon 
shews  "  that  the  Nicene  fathers  entertained 
no  doubt  that  the  faithful  in  the  holy  Com- 
munion truly  received  '  the  body  of  Christ.'  " 
Now  this  statement  is  of  course  true  because 
it  is  included  in  what  the  canon  says,  but  the 
doctrinal  statement  which  is  necessarily  con- 
tained in  the  canon  is  that  "the  body  of 
Christ  is  given  "  by  the  minister  to  the  faith- 
ful. This  doctrine  is  believed  by  all  Catho- 
lics and  by  Lutherans,  but  is  denied  by  all 
other  Protestants  ;  those  Calvinists  who  kept 
most  nearly  to  the  ordinary  Catholic  phrase- 
ology only  admitting  that  "the  sacrament  of 
the  Body  of  Christ "  was  given  in  the  supper  by 
the  minister,  while  "  the  body  of  Christ,"  they 
taught,  was  present  only  in  the  soul  of  the 
worthy  communicant  (and  in  no  way  con- 
nected with  the  form  of  bread,  which  was  but 
the  divinely  appointed  sign  and  assurance  of 
the  heavenly  gift),  and  therefore  could  not  be 
"  given  "  by  the  priest. a 

This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici,  Decretum.  Pars  I.  Dist.  XCIIL,  c. 
xiv. 


1  Ignat.  Ad  Smyr.  5  vi.  Lightfoot's  translation.  Apott.  rath. 
Vol.  II.  Sec.  I.  p.  569.  __       ,_ 

>Cf.  Art.  xxviij.  of  the  "Articles  of  Religion"  of  the  Church 
of  England,  which  declares  that  "  The  Body  of  Christ  is  given, 
taken,  and  eaten  in  the  Supper,"  etc. 


40 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


CANON  XIX. 

Concerning  the  Paulianists  who  have  flown  for  refuge  to  the  Catholic  Church,  it  has 
been  decreed  that  they  must  by  all  means  be  rebaptized ;  and  if  any  of  them  who  in 
past  time  have  been  numbered  among  their  clergy  should  be  found  blameless  and  with- 
out reproach,  let  them  be  rebaptized  and  ordained  by  the  Bishop  of  the  Catholic  Church  ; 
but  if  the  examination  should  discover  them  to  be  unfit,  they  ought  to  be  deposed. 
Likewise  in  the  case  of  their  deaconesses,  and  generally  in  the  case  of  those  who  have 
been  enrolled  among  their  clergy,  let  the  same  form  be  observed.  And  we  mean  by 
deaconesses  such  as  have  assumed  the  habit,  but  who,  since  they  have  no  imposition  of 
hands,  are  to  be  numbered  only  among  the  laity. 


NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XIX. 


Paulianists  must  be  rebaptised,  and  if  such 
as  are  clergymen  seem  to  be  blameless  let  them 
be  ordained.  If  they  do  not  seem  to  be  blame- 
less, let  them  be  deposed.  Deaconesses  who 
have  been  led  astray,  since  they  are  not  sharers 
of  ordination,  are  to  be  reckoned  among  the 
laity. 

Ffoulkes. 

(Diet.  Chr.  Ant.  s.v.  Nicaea,  Councils  of.) 

That  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  phrase 
opos  eKTeSeirai,  viz.  "a  decree  has  now  been 
made,"  is  clear  from  the  application  of  the 
words  opos  in  Canon  xvii.,  and  wptcro/,  in  Canon 
vi.  It  has  been  a  pure  mistake,  therefore, 
which  Bp.  Hefele  blindly  follows,  to  under- 
stand it  of  some  canon  previously  passed, 
whether  at  Aries  or  elsewhere. 

Justellus. 

Here  x€lP°^i(T^a  is  taken  for  ordination  or 
consecration,  not  for  benediction, 
for  neither  were  deaconesses,  sub-deacons, 
readers,  and  other  ministers  ordained,  but  a 
blessing  was  merely  pronounced  over  them 
by  prayer  and  imposition  of  hands. 

Aristenus. 

Their  (the  Paulicians')  deaconesses  also, 
since  they  have  no  imposition  of  hands,  if  they 
come  over  to  the  Catholic  Church  and  are 
baptized,  are  ranked  among  the  laity. 

With  this  Zonaras  and  Balsamon  also 
agree. 

Hefele. 

By  Paulianists  must  be  understood  the  fol- 
lowers of  Paul  of  Samosata  the  anti-Trinita- 
rian who,  about  the  year  260,  had  been  made 
bishop  of  Antioch,  but  had  been  deposed  by 
a  great  Synod  in  2G9.     As  Paul  of  Samosata 


j  was  heretical  in  his  teaching  on  the  Holy 
Trinity  the  Synod  of  Nice  applied  to  him  the 
decree  passed  by  the  council  of  Aries  in  its 
eighth  canon.  "  If  anyone  shall  come  from 
heresy  to  the  Church,  they  shall  ask  him  to 
say  the  creed  ;  and  if  they  shall  perceive  that 
he  was  baptized  into  the  Father,  and  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,1  he  shall  have  a  hand  laid 
on  him  only  that  he  may  receive  the  Holy 
i  Ghost.  But  if  in  answer  to  their  question- 
ing he  shall  not  answer  this  Trinity,  let  him 
be  baptized." 

The  Samosatans,  according  to  St.  Athana- 
sius,  named  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit 
in  administering  baptism  (Orat.  ii,  Contra 
Arian.  No.  xliii),  but  as  they  gave  a  false 
meaning  to  the  baptismal  formula  and  did 
not  use  the  words  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
usual  sense,  the  Council  of  Nice,  like  St.  Ath- 
anasius  himself,  considered  their  baptism  as 
invalid. 

There  is  great  difficulty  about  the  text  of 
the  clause  beginning  "  Likewise  in  the  case, 
etc.,"  and  Gelasius,  the  Prisca,  Theilo  and 
Thearistus.  (who  in  419  translated  the  canons 
of  Nice  for  the  African  bishops),  the  Pseudo- 
Isidore,  and  Gratian  have  all  followed  a  read- 
ing Siaxovuiv,  instead  of  SiaKoviaawv.  This 
change  makes  all  clear,  but  many  canonists 
keep  the  ordinary  text,  including  Van  Espen, 
with  whose  interpretation  Hefele  does  not 
agree. 

The  clause  I  have  rendered  "  And  we 
mean  by  deaconesses "  is  most  difficult  of 
translation.      I  give  the  original,  'Ep.vyaSvp.iv 

8k    SiaKoviCTOw    twv    iv  tuj   cr^jpaTi    ($(Tad3euTwv, 

e7r£i  k.  t.  A.  Hefele's  translation  seems  to  me 
impossible,  by  a^parL  he  understands  the  list 
of  the  clergy  just  mentioned. 

1  In  Patre  et  Filio  et  Spiritu  Sancto  esee  baptizatucu. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


41 


EXCURSUS  ON  THE  DEACONESS   OF  THE  EARLY   CHURCH. 

It  Las  been  supposed  by  many  that  the  deaconess  of  the  Early  Church  had  an  Apostolic 
institution  and  that  its  existence  may  be  referred  to  by  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans 
(xvi.  1)  where  he  speaks  of  Phoebe  as  being  a  Sidxovos  of  the  Church  of  Cenchrea.  It  more- 
over has  been  suggested  that  the  "  widows  "  of  1  Tim.  v.  9  may  have  been  deaconesses,  and 
this  seems  not  unlikely  from  the  fact  that  the  age  for  the  admission  of  women  to  this  minis- 
try was  fixed  by  Tertullian  at  sixty  years  (De  Vel.  Virg.  Cap.  ix.),  and  only  changed  to 
forty,  two  centuries  later  by  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  and  from  the  further  fact  that  these 
"  widows  "  spoken  of  by  St.  Paul  seem  to  have  had  a  vow  of  chastity,  for  it  is  expressly  said 
that  if  they  marry  they  have  "damnation,  because  they  have  cast  off  their  first  faith  "  (1  Tim. 
v.  12). 

These  women  were  called  SiaKovia-aai,  irpccr/JuTiSc?  (which  must  be  distinguished  from  the 
Tpeaf3vT(fyat,  a  poor  class  referred  to  in  the  Apostolic  Constitutions  (ii.  28)  who  are  to  be  only 
invited  frequently  to  the  love-feasts,  while  the  7rp€o-/3ur<oes  had  a  definite  allotment  of  the 
offerings  assigned  to  their  support),  x*)Pati  diaconissce,  presbyterce,  and  viduce. 

The  one  great  characteristic  of  the  deaconess  was  that  she  was  vowed  to  perpetual  chas- 
tity.1 The  Apostolical  Constitutions  (vi.  17)  say  that  she  must  be  a  chaste  virgin  (jrapSivo<;  ayvij) 
or  else  a  widow.  The  writer  of  the  article  "Deaconess  "  in  the  Dictionary  of  Christian  Antiq- 
uities says:  "It  is  evident  that  the  ordination  of  deaconesses  included  a  vow  of  celibacy." 
"We  have  already  seen  the  language  used  by  St.  Paul  and  of  this  the  wording  of  the 
canon  of  Chalcedon  is  but  an  echo  (Canon  xv).  "  A  woman  shall  not  receive  the  laying  on  of 
hands  as  a  deaconess  under  forty  years  of  age,  and  then  only  after  searching  examination. 
And  if,  after  she  has  had  hands  laid  on  her,  and  has  continued  for  a  time  to  minister,  she 
shall  despise  the  Grace  of  God  and  give  herself  in  marriage,  she  shall  be  anathematized  and 
the  man  who  is  united  to  her."  The  civil  law  went  still  further,  and  by  Justinian's  Sixth 
Novel  (6)  those  who  attempted  to  marry  are  subjected  to  forfeiture  of  property  and  capital 
punishment.  In  the  collect  in  the  ancient  office  there  is  a  special  petition  that  the  newly 
admitted  deaconess  may  have  the  gift  of  continence. 

The  principal  work  of  the  deaconess  was  to  assist  the  female  candidates  for  holy  baptism. 
At  that  time  the  sacrament  of  baptism  was  always  administered  by  immersion  (except  to 
those  in  extreme  illness)  and  hence  there  was  much  that  such  an  order  of  women  could  be 
useful  in.  Moreover  they  sometimes  gave  to  the  female  catechumens  preliminary  instruc- 
tion, but  their  work  was  wholly  limited  to  women,  and  for  a  deaconess  of  the  Early  Church 
to  teach  a  man  or  to  nurse  him  in  sickness  would  have  been  an  impossibility.  The  duties 
of  the  deaconess  are  set  forth  in  many  ancient  writings,  I  cite  here  what  is  commonly  known 
as  the  XII  Canon  of  the  Fourth  Council  of  Carthage,  which  met  in  the  year  398  : 

"  Widows  and  dedicated  women  (sanctimoniales)  who  are  chosen  to  assist  at  the  baptism 
of  women,  should  be  so  well  instructed  in  their  office  as  to  be  able  to  teach  aptly  and  prop- 
erly unskilled  and  rustic  women  how  to  answer  at  the  time  of  their  baptism  to  the  questions 
put  to  them,  and  also  how  to  live  godly  after  they  have  been  baptized."  This  whole  matter 
is  treated  clearly  by  St.  Epiphanius  who,  while  indeed  speaking  of  deaconesses  as  an  order 
(•j-ay/xa),  asserts  that  "they  were  only  women-elders,  not  priestesses  in  any  sense,  that  their 


1  In  1836,  the  Lutheran  Pastor  Fliedner,  of  a  little  town  on  the 
Rhine,  opened  a  parish  hospital  the  nurses  of  which  he  called 
"  Deaconesses."  This  "  Deaconess  House  "  at  Kaiserswerth.  was 
the  mother-house  from  which  all  the  deaconess  establishments  of 
the  present  day  have  taken  their  origin.  The  Methodists  have 
adopted  the  system  successfully.  Some  efforts  have  been  made 
to  domesticate  it,  in  a  gomewhat  modified  form,  also  in  the  Aneli- 
can  Churches  but  thus  far  with  but  little  success.  Of  course  these 
"  Deaconesses''  resemble  the  Deaconesses  of  the  Early  Church 


only  in  name.  The  reader  who  may  be  interested  in  seeing  an 
effort  to  connect  the  modern  deaconess  with  the  deaconess  of  an- 
tiquity is  referred  to  The  Ministry  of  Deaconesses  by  Deaconess 
Cecilia  Robinson.  This  book,  it  should  be  said,  contains  much 
valuable  and  accurate  information  upon  the  subject,  but  accepts 
as  proven  facts  the  suppositions  of  the  late  Bishop  Lightfoot 
upon  the  subject ;  who  somewhat  rashly  asserted  that  "the  female 
diaconate  is  as  definite  an  institution  as  the  male  diaconate. 
Phoebe  is  as  much  a  deacon  as  Stephen  or  Philip  is  a  deacon ! " 


42 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


mission  was  not  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  Sacerdotal  functions,  but  simply  to  perform 
certain  offices  in  the  care  of  women"  (Hcer.  lxxix,  cap.  iij).  From  all  this  it  is  evident  that 
they  are  entirely  in  error  who  suppose  that  "the  laying  on  of  hands"  which  the  deaconesses 
received  corresponded  to  that  by  which  persons  were  ordained  to  the  diaconate,  presbyterate, 
and  episcopate  at  that  period  of  the  church's  history.  It  was  merely  a  solemn  dedication 
and  blessing  and  was  not  looked  upon  as  "an  outward  sign  of  an  inward  grace  given."  For 
further  proof  of  this  I  must  refer  to  Morinus,  who  has  treated  the  matter  most  admirably. 
{De  Ordinationibus,  Exercitatio  X.) 

The  deaconesses  existed  but  a  short  while.  The  council  of  Laodicea  as  early  as  a.d. 
343-381,  forbade  the  appointment  of  any  who  were  called  wpecr/JimScs  ( Vide  Canon  xi)  ;  and 
the  first  council  of  Orange,  a.d.  441,  in  its  twenty-sixth  canon  forbids  the  appointment  of 
deaconesses  altogether,  and  the  Second  council  of  the  same  city  in  canons  xvij  and  xviij,  de- 
crees that  deaconesses  who  married  were  to  be  excommunicated  unless  they  renounced  the 
men  they  were  living  with,  and  that,  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  the  sex,  none  for  the 
futui  e  were  to  be  ordained. 

Thomassinus,  to  whom  I  refer  the  reader  for  a  very  full  treatment  of  the  whole  subject, 
is  of  opinion  that  the  order  was  extinct  in  the  West  by  the  tenth  or  twelfth  century,  but 
that  it  lingered  on  a  little  later  at  Constantinople  but  only  in  conventual  institutions.  (Thom- 
assin,  Ancienne  et  Nouvelle  Discipline  de  VJ^glise,  I  Partie,  Livre  III.) 


CANON  XX. 


Forasmuch  as  there  are  certain  persons  who  kneel  on  the  Lord's  Day  and  in  the  days 
of  Pentecost,  therefore,  to  the  intent  that  all  things  may  be  uniformly  observed  every- 
where (in  every  parish),  it  seems  good  to  the  holy  Synod  that  prayer  be  made  to  God 
standing. 

NOTES. 


Ancient  Epitome  of  Canon  XX. 

On  Lord's  days  and  at  Pentecost  all  must 
pray  standing  and  not  kneeling. 

Hammond. 

Although  kneeling  was  the  common  posture 
for  prayer  in  the  primitive  Church,  yet  the 
custom  had  prevailed,  even  from  the  earliest 
times,  of  standing  at  prayer  on  the  Lord's 
day,  and  during  the  fifty  days  between  Easter 
and  Pentecost.  Tertullian,  in  a  passage  in  his 
treatise  De  Corona  Militis,  which  is  often 
quoted,  mentions  it  amongst  other  observ- 
ances which,  though  not  expressly  command- 
ed in  Scripture,  yet  were  universally  prac- 
tised upon  the  authority  of  tradition.  '•'  We 
consider  it  unlawful,"  he  says,  "  to  fast,  or  to 
pray  kneeling,  upon  the  Lord's  day ;  we  en- 
joy the  same  liberty  from  Easter-day  to  that 
of  Pentecost."  De  Cor.  Mil.  s.  3,  4.  Many 
other  of  the  Fathers  notice  the  same  practice, 
the  reason  of  which,  as  given  by  Augustine 
and  others,  was  to  commemorate  the  resur- 


rection of  our  Lord,  and  to  signify  the  rest 
and  joy  of  our  own  resurrection,  which  that  of 
our  Lord  assured.     This  canon,  as  Beveridge 
observes,  is  a  proof  of  the  importance  former- 
ly attached  to  an  uniformity  of  sacred  rites 
throughout  the  Church,  which  made  the  Ni- 
cene  Fathers  thus  sanction  and  enforce  by 
their  authority  a  practice  which  in  itself  is  in- 
different, and  not  commanded  directly  or  in- 
|  directly  in  Scripture,  and  assign  this  as  their 
|  reason  for  doing  so :  "  In  order  that  all  things 
I  may  be  observed  in  like  manner  in  every  par- 
ish "  or  diocese. 

Hefele. 

All  the  churches  did  not,  however,  adopt 
this  practice  ;  for  we  see  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  (xx.  36  and  xxi.  5)  that  St.  Paul 
prayed  kneeling  during  the  time  between  Pen- 
tecost and  Easter. 

This  canon  is  found  in  the  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici.  Decretum,  Pars  III,  De  Cone. 
Dist.  III.  c.  x. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


43 


EXCURSUS  ON  THE  NUMBER  OF  THE  NICENE  CANONS. 

There  has  come  down  to  us  a  Latin  letter  purporting  to  have  been  written  by  St.  Atha- 
nasius  to  Pope  Marcus.  This  letter  is  found  in  the  Benedictine  edition  of  St.  Athanasius's 
works  (ed.  Patav.  ii.  599)  but  rejected  as  spurious  by  Montfaucon  the  learned  editor.  In  this 
letter  is  contained  the  marvellous  assertion  that  the  Council  of  Nice  at  first  adopted  forty 
canons,  which  were  in  Greek,  that  it  subsequently  added  twenty  Latin  canons,  and  that  after- 
wards the  council  reassembled  and  set  forth  seventy  altogether.  A  tradition  that  some- 
thing of  the  kind  had  taken  place  was  prevalent  in  parts  of  the  East,  and  some  collections 
did  contain  seventy  canons. 

In  the  Vatican  Library  is  a  MS.  which  was  bought  for  it  by  the  famous  Asseman,  from 
the  Coptic  Patriarch,  John,  and  which  contains  not  only  seventy,  but  eighty  canons  attrib- 
uted to  the  council  of  Nice.  The  MS.  is  in  Arabic,  and  was  discovered  by  J.  B.  Romanus, 
S.  J.,  who  first  made  its  contents  known,  and  translated  into  Latin  a  copy  he  had  made  of  it. 
Another  Jesuit,  Pisanus,  was  writing  a  history  of  the  Nicene  Council  at  the  time  and  he 
received  the  eighty  newly  found  canons  into  his  book  ;  but,  out  of  respect  to  the  pseudo- 
Athanasian  letter,  he  at  first  cut  down  the  number  to  seventy ;  but  in  later  editions  he  fol- 
lowed the  MS.  All  this  was  in  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  ;  and  in  1578  Turri- 
anus,  who  had  had  Father  Romanus's  translation  revised  before  it  was  first  published,  now 
issued  an  entirely  new  translation  with  a  Proemium  l  containing  a  vast  amount  of  informa- 
tion upon  the  whole  subject,  and  setting  up  an  attempted  proof  that  the  number  of  the 
Nicene  Canons  exceeded  twenty.     His  argument  for  the  time  being  carried  the  day. 

Hefele  says,  "  it  is  certain  that  the  Orientals 2  believed  the  Council  of  Nice  to  have  promul- 
gated more  than  twenty  canons  :  the  learned  Anglican,  Beveridge,3  has  proved  this,  repro- 
ducing an  ancient  Arabic  paraphrase  of  the  canons  of  the  first  four  Ecumenical  Councils. 
According  to  this  Arabic  paraphrase,  found  in  a  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  the  Council  of 
Nice  must  have  put  forth  three  books  of  canons.  .  .  .  The  Arabic  paraphrase  of  which 
we  are  speaking  gives  a  paraphrase  of  all  these  canons,  but  Beveridge  took  only  the  part 
referring  to  the  second  book — that  is  to  say,  the  paraphrase  of  the  twenty  genuine  canons  ; 
for,  according  to  his  view,  which  was  perfectly  correct,  it  was  only  these  twenty  canons 
which  were  really  the  work  of  the  Council  of  Nice,  and  all  the  others  were  falsely  attributed 
to  it."4 

Hefele  goes  on  to  prove  that  the  canons  he  rejects  must  be  of  much  later  origin,  some 
being  laws  of  the  times  of  Theodosius  and  Justinian  according  to  the  opinion  of  Renaudot.5 

Before  leaving  this  point  I  should  notice  the  profound  research  on  these  Arabic  canons 
of  the  Maronite,  Abraham  Echellensis.  He  gives  eighty-four  canons  in  his  Latin  translation 
of  1645,  and  was  of  opinion  that  they  had  been  collected  from  different  Oriental  sources,  and 
sects  ;  but  that  originally  they  had  all  been  translated  from  the  Greek,  and  were  collected 
by  James,  the  celebrated  bishop  of  Nisibis,  who  was  present  at  Nice.  But  this  last  supposi- 
tion is  utterly  untenable. 

Among  the  learned  there  have  not  been  wanting  some  who  have  held  that  the  Council  of 
Nice  passed  more  canons  than  the  twenty  we  possess,  and  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion 
independently  of  the  Arabic  discovery,  such  are  Baronius  and  Card.  d'Aguirre,  but  their 
arguments  have  been  sufficiently  answered,  and  they  cannot  present  anything  able  to  weaken 
the  conclusion  that  flows  from  the  consideration  of  the  following  facts. 


1  Vide  Labbe.  Cone.  ii.  287. 

'Who  exactly  these  "Orientals"  were  Hefele  does  not  speci- 
fy, but  Ffoulkes  well  points  out  (Diet.  Christ.  Antiq.  sub  vnee 
Councils  of  Nic;en)that  it  is  an  entire  mistake  to  suppose  that  the 
Greek  Church  "  over  quoted  other  canons  [than  the  xx]  as  Nicene 


'  by  mistake.'  which  were  not  Nicene,  as  popes  Zosimus,  Innocent 
and  Leo  did."  3  Beveridge    Synod,  sive  J'and.  i.  686. 

*  Hefele  :  Hist.  Councils,  I.  362. 

5  Kenaudot :  Hist.  Patriarckarum  Alexandrianorum  Jacob- 
itarum.     Paris,  1713,  p.  75. 


44  I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


(Hefele  :  History  of  the  Councils,  Vol.  I.  pp.  355  el  seqg.     [2d  ed.]) 

Let  us  see  first  what  is  the  testimony  of  those  Greek  and  Latin  authors  who  lived  about 
the  time  of  the  Council,  concerning  the  number. 

a.  The  first  to  be  consulted  among  the  Greek  authors  is  the  learned  Theodoret,  who 
lived  about  a  century  after  the  Council  of  Nicsea.  He  says,  in  his  History  of  the  Church  : 
"After  the  condemnation  of  the  Arians,  the  bishops  assembled  once  more,  and  decreed  twenty 
canons  on  ecclesiastical  discipline." 

b.  Twenty  years  later,  Gelasius,  Bishop  of  Cyzicus,  after  much  research  into  the  most 
ancient  documents,  wrote  a  history  of  the  Nicene  Council.  Gelasius  also  says  expressly  that 
the  Council  decreed  twenty  canons  ;  and,  what  is  more  important,  he  gives  the  original  text  of 
these  canons  exactly  in  the  same  order,  and  according  to  the  tenor  which  we  find  elsewhere. 

c.  Rufinus  is  more  ancient  than  these  two  historians.  He  was  born  near  the  period 
when  the  Council  of  Nicsea  was  held,  and  about  half  a  century  after  he  wrote  his  celebrated 
history  of  the  Church,  in  which  he  inserted  a  Latin  translation  of  the  Nicene  canons.  Rufi- 
nus also  knew  only  of  these  twenty  canons  ;  but  as  he  has  divided  the  sixth  and  the  eighth 
into  two  parts,  he  has  given  twenty-two  canons,  which  are  exactly  the  same  as  the  twenty  fur- 
nished by  the  other  historians. 

d.  The  famous  discussion  between  the  African  bishops  and  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  on  the 
subject  of  appeals  to  Rome,  gives  us  a  very  important  testimony  on  the  true  number  of 
the  Nicene  canons.  The  presbyter  Apiarius  of  Sicca  in  Africa,  having  been  deposed  for 
many  crimes,  appealed  to  Rome.  Pope  Zosimus  (417-418)  took  the  appeal  into  considera- 
tion, sent  legates  to  Africa ;  and  to  prove  that  he  had  the  right  to  act  thus,  he  quoted  a 
canon  of  the  Council  of  Nicsea,  containing  these  words:  "  When  a  bishop  thinks  he  has  been 
unjustly  deposed  by  his  colleagues  he  may  appeal  to  Rome,  aud  the  Roman  bishop  shall  have 
the  business  decided  bjjudices  in  partibus."  The  canon  quoted  by  the  Pope  does  not  belong 
to  the  Council  of  Nicsea,  as  he  affirmed  ;  it  was  the  fifth  canon  of  the  Council  of  Sardica  (the 
seventh  in  the  Latin  version).  What  explains  the  error  of  Zosimus  is  that  in  the  ancient 
copies  the  canons  of  Nicsea  and  Sardica  are  written  consecutively,  with  the  same  figures,  and 
under  the  common  title  of  canons  of  the  Council  of  Nicaea  ;  and  Zosimus  might  optima  fide 
fall  into  an  error — which  he  shared  with  Greek  authors,  his  contemporaries,  who  also  mixed 
the  canons  of  Nicsea  with  those  of  Sardica.  The  African  bishops,  not  finding  the  canon  quoted 
by  the  Pope  either  in  their  Greek  or  in  their  Latin  copies,  in  vain  consulted  also  the  copy 
which  Bishop  Cecilian,  who  had  himself  been  present  at  the  Council  of  Nicsea,  had  brought  to 
Carthage.  The  legates  of  the  Pope  then  declared  that  they  did  not  rely  upon  these  copies, 
and  they  agreed  to  send  to  Alexandria  and  to  Constantinople  to  ask  the  patriarchs  of  these  two 
cities  for  authentic  copies  of  the  cauons  of  the  Council  of  Nicsea.  The  African  bishops  desired 
in  their  turn  that  Pope  Boniface  should  take  the  same  step  (Pope  Zosimus  had  died  meanwhile 
in  418) — that  he  should  ask  for  copies  from  the  Archbishops  of  Constantinople,  Alexandria,  and 
Antioch.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  and  Atticus  of  Constantinople,  indeed,  sent  exact  and  faithful 
copies  of  the  Creed  and  canons  of  Nicsea ;  and  two  learned  men  of  Constantinople,  Theilo 
and  Thearistus,  even  translated  these  canons  into  Latin.  Their  translation  has  been  pre- 
served to  us  in  the  acts  of  the  sixth  Council  of  Carthage,  and  it  contains  only  the  twenty 
ordinary  canons.  It  might  be  thought  at  first  sight  that  it  contained  twenty-one  canons  ; 
but  on  closer  consideration  we  see,  as  Hardouin  has  proved,  that  this  twenty-first  article  is 
nothing  but  an  historical  notice  appended  to  the  Nicene  canons  by  the  Fathers  of  Carthage. 
It  is  conceived  in  these  terms :  "  After  the  bishops  had  decreed  these  rules  at  Nicsea,  and 
after  the  holy  Council  had  decided  what  was  the  ancient  rule  for  the  celebration  of  Easter, 
peace  and  unity  of  faith  were  re-established  between  the  East  and  the  West.  This  is  what 
we  (the  African  bishops)  have  thought  it  right  to  add  according  to  the  history  of  the  Church.' 


I.  NICE.     A. P.  325  45 


The  bishops  of  Africa  despatched  to  Pope  Boniface  the  copies  which  had  been  sent  to 
them  from  Alexandria  and  Constantinople,  in  the  month  of  November  419  ;  and  subsequently 
in  their  letters  to  Celestine  I.  (423-432),  successor  to  Boniface,  they  appealed  to  the  text  of 
these  documents. 

c.  All  the  ancient  collections  of  canons,  either  in  Latin  or  Greek,  composed  in  the  fourth, 
or  quite  certainly  at  least  in  the  fifth  century,  agree  in  giving  only  these  twenty  canons  to 
Nicsea.  The  most  ancient  of  these  collections  were  made  in  the  Greek  Church,  and  in  the 
course  of  time  a  very  great  number  of  copies  of  them  were  written.  Many  of  these  copies 
have  descended  to  us ;  many  libraries  possess  copies  ;  thus  Montfaucon  enumerates  several 
in  his  Bibliothcca  Coisliniana.  Fabricius  makes  a  similar  catalogue  of  the  copies  in  his  Biblio- 
thcca Gr<vea  to  those  found  in  the  libraries  of  Turin,  Florence,  Venice,  Oxford,  Moscow,  etc.; 
and  he  adds  that  these  copies  also  contain  the  so-called  apostolic  canons,  and  those  of  the 
most  ancient  councils.  The  French  bishop  John  Tilius  presented  to  Paris,  in  1540,  a  MS. 
of  one  of  these  Greek  collections  as  it  existed  in  the  ninth  century.  It  contains  exactly  our 
twenty  canons  of  Nicsea,  besides  the  so-called  apostolic  canons,  those  of  Ancyra,  etc.  Elias 
Ehmger  published  a  new  edition  at  Wittemberg  in  1614.  using  a  second  MS.  which  was 
found  at  Augsburg  ;  but  the  Roman  collection  of  the  Councils  had  before  given  in  1608, 
the  Greek  text  of  the  twenty  canons  of  Nicsea.  This  text  of  the  Roman  editors,  with 
the  exception  of  some  insignificant  variations,  was  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  the  edition 
of  Tilius.  Neither  the  learned  Jesuit  Sirmond  nor  his  coadjutors  have  mentioned  what 
manuscripts  were  consulted  in  preparing  this  edition  ;  probably  they  were  manuscripts  drawn 
from  several  libraries,  and  particularly  from  that  of  the  Vatican.  The  text  of  this  Roman 
edition  passed  into  all  the  following  collections,  even  into  those  of  Hardouin  and  Mansi  ; 
while  Justell  in  his  Bibliothcca  juris  Canonici  and  Beveridge  in  his  S'/nodicon  (both  of  the; 
eighteenth  century),  give  a  somewhat  different  text,  also  collated  from  MSS.,  and  very  simi- 
lar to  the  text  given  by  Tilius.  Bruns,  in  his  recent  Bibliotheca  Ecclesiastica,  compares  the 
two  texts.  Now  all  these  Greek  MSS.  consulted  at  such  different  times,  and  by  all  these 
editors,  acknowledge  only  twenty  canons  of  Nicsea,  and  always  the  same  twenty  which  we 
possess. 

The  Latin  collections  of  the  canons  of  the  Councils  also  give  the  same  result — for  exam- 
ple, the  most  ancient  and  the  most  remarkable  of  all,  the  Prisca,  and  that  of  Dionysius  the 
Less,  which  was  collected  about  the  year  500.  The  testimony  of  this  latter  collection  is  the 
more  important  for  the  number  twenty,  as  Dionysius  refers  to  the  Gro?ca  auctoritas. 

f.  Among  the  later  Eastern  witnesses  we  may  further  mention  Photius,  Zonaras  and 
Balsamon.  Photius,  in  his  Collection  of  the  Canons,  and  in  his  Nomocanon,  as  well  as  the 
two  other  writers  in  their  commentaries  upon  the  canons  of  the  ancient  Councils,  quote 
only  and  know  only  twenty  canons  of  Nicsea,  and  always  those  which  we  possess. 

g.  The  Latin  canonists  of  the  Middle  Ages  also  acknowledge  only  these  twenty  canons  of 
Nicsea.  We  have  proof  of  this  in  the  celebrated  Spanish  collection,  which  is  generally  but 
erroneously  attributed  to  St.  Isidore  (it  was  composed  at  the  commencement  of  the  seventh 
century),  and  in  that  of  Adrian  (so  called  because  it  was  offered  to  Charles  the  Great  by 
Pope  Adrian  I).  The  celebrated  Hincmar,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  the  first  canonist  of  the 
ninth  century,  in  his  turn  attributes  only  twenty  canons  to  the  Council  of  Nicsea,  and  even 
the  pseudo-Isidore  assigns  it  no  more. 

I  add  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader  the  captions  of  the  Eighty  Canons  as  given  by 
Turrianus,  translating  them  from  the  reprint  in  Labbe  and  Cossart,  Concilia,  Tom.  II.  col.  291. 
The  Eighty -four  Canons  as  given  by  Echellensis  together  with  numerous  Constitutions  and 
Decrees  attributed  to  the  Nicene  Council  are  likewise  to  be  found  in  Labbe  (ut  supra,  col.  318). 


46 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


THE  CAPTIONS  OF  THE   ARABIC    CANONS   ATTRIBUTED    TO  THE   COUNCIL 

OF  NICE. 


Canon  I.1 

Insane  persons  and  energumens  should  not 
be  ordained. 

Canon  II. 

Bond  servants  are  not  to  be  ordained. 

Canon  III. 

Neophytes  in  the  faith  are  not  to  be  or- 
dained to  Holy  Orders  before  they  have  a 
knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture.  And  such,  if 
convicted  after  their  ordination  of  grave  sin, 
are  to  be  deposed  with  those  who  ordained 
them. 

Canon  IV. 

The  cohabitation  of  women  with  bishops, 
presbyters,  and  deacons  prohibited  on  ac- 
count of  their  celibacy. 

We  decree  that  bishops  shall  not  live  with 
women  ;  nor  shall  a  presbyter  who  is  a  wid- 
ower ;  neither  shall  they  escort  them  ;  nor  be 
familiar  with  them,  nor  gaze  upon  them  per- 
sistently. And  the  same  decree  is  made  with 
regard  to  every  celibate  priest,  and  the  same 
concerning  such  deacons  as  have  no  wives. 
And  this  is  to  be  the  case  whether  the  woman 
be  beautiful  or  ugly,  whether  a  young  girl  or 
beyond  the  age  of  puberty,  whether  great  in 
birth,  or  an  orphan  taken  out  of  charity  under 
pretext  of  bringing  her  up.  For  the  devil 
with  such  arms  slays  religious,  bishops,  pres- 
bvters,  and  deacons,  and  incites  them  to  the 
fires  of  desire.  But  if  she  be  an  old  woman, 
and  of  advanced  age,  or  a  sister,  or  mother, 
or  aunt,  or  grandmother,  it  is  permitted  to 
live  with  these  because  such  persons  are  free 
from  all  suspicion  of  scandal.2 

Canon  V. 
Of  the  election  of  a  bishop  and  of  the  con- 
firmation of  the  election. 

Canon  VI. 
That  those  excommunicated  by  one  bishop 
are  not  to  be  received  by  another  ;  and  that 
those  whose  excommunication  has  been  shown 
to  have  been  unjust  should  be  absolved  by 
the  archbishop  or  patriarch. 

Canon  VII. 
That  provincial   Councils  should   be   held 
twice  a  year,  for  the  consideration  of  all  things 

1  Turrianus  calls  them  "Chapters." 

2 1  have  translated  this  canon  in  full  because  the  caption  did 
not  seem  to  give  fairly  its  meaning.  Iu  Labbe  will  be  found  a 
long  and  most  curious  note. 


affecting  the  churches  of  the  bishops  of  the 
province. 

Canon  VIII. 

Of  the  patriarchs  of  Alexandria  and  An- 
tioch,  and  of  their  jurisdiction. 

Canon  IX. 

Of  one  who  solicits  the  episcopate  when 
the  people  do  not  wish  him  ;  or  if  they  do 
desire  him,  but  without  the  consent  of  the 
archbishop. 

Canon  X. 

How  the  bishop  of  Jerusalem  is  to  be  hon- 
oured, the  honour,  however,  of  the  metropol- 
itan church  of  Csesarea  being  preserved  in- 
tact, to  which  he  is  subject. 

Canon  XL 

Of  those  who  force  themselves  into  the  or- 
der of  presbyters  without  election  or  exam- 
ination. 

Canon  XII. 

Of  the  bishop  who  ordains  one  whom  he 
understands  has  denied  the  faith  ;  also  of  one 
ordained  who  after  that  he  had  denied  it, 
crept  into  orders. 

Canon  XHI. 

Of  one  who  of  his  own  will  goes  to  another 
church,  having  been  chosen  by  it,  and  does 
not  wish  afterwards  to  stay  there. 

Of  taking  pains  that  he  be  transferred  from 
his  own  church  to  another. 

Canon  XIV. 

No  one  shall  become  a  monk  without  the 
bishop's  license,  and  why  a  license  is  required. 

Canon  XV. 

That  clerics  or  religious  who  lend  on  usury 
should  be  cast  from  their  grade. 

Canon  XVI. 

Of  the  honour  to  be  paid  to  the  bishop  and 
to  a  presbyter  by  the  deacons. 

Canon  XVII. 

Of  the  system  and  of  the  manner  of  receiv- 
ing those  who  are  converted  from  the  heresy 
of  Paul  of  Samosata. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


47 


Canon  XVIII. 
Of  the  system   and  manner   of   receiving 
those  who  are  converted  from  the  heresy  of 
the  Novatians. 

Canon  XIX. 
Of  the  system  and  manner  of  receiving 
those  who  return  after  a  lapse  from  the  faith, 
and  of  receiving  the  relapsed,  and  of  those 
brought  into  peril  of  death  by  sickness  before 
their  penance  is  finished,  and  concerning  such 
as  are  convalescent. 

Canon  XX. 
Of  avoiding  the  conversation  of  evil  work- 
ers and  wizards,  also  of  the  penance  of  them 
that  have  not  avoided  such. 

Canon  XXI. 

Of  incestuous  marriages  contrary  to  the 
law  of  spiritual  relationship,  and  of  the  pen- 
ance of  such  as  are  in  such  marriages. 

[The  time  of  penance  fixed  is  twenty  years, 
only  godfather  and  godmother  are  mentioned, 
and  nothing  is  said  of  separation.] 

Canon  XXII. 

Of  sponsors  in  baptism. 

Men  shall  not  hold  females  at.  the  font, 
neither  women  males;  but  women  females, 
and  men  males. 

Canon  XXIII. 
Of  the  prohibited  marriages   of   spiritual 
brothers  and  sisters  from  receiving  them  in 
baptism. 

Canon  XXIV. 

Of  him  who  has  married  two  wives  at  the 
same  time,  or  who  through  lust  has  added 
another  woman  to  his  wife  ;  and  of  his  pun- 
ishment. 

Part  of  the  canon.  If  he  be  a  priest  he  is 
forbidden  to  sacrifice  and  is  cut  off  from  the 
communion  of  the  faithful  until  he  turn  out 
of  the  house  the  second  woman,  and  he  ought 
to  retain  the  first. 

Canon  XXV. 
That   no   one   should   be   forbidden   Holy 
Communion  unless  such  as  are  doing  penance. 

Canon  XXVI. 
Clerics  are  forbidden  from   suretyship   or 
witness-giving  in  criminal  causes. 

Canon  XXVII. 
Of  avoiding  the  excommunicate,  and  of  not 
receiving  the  oblation  from  them  ;  and  of  the 


excommunication  of  him  who  does  not  avoid 
the  excommunicated. 

Canon  XXVIII. 
How  anger,  indignation,  and  hatred  should 
be  avoided  by  the  priest,  especially  because 
he  has  the  power  of  excommunicating  others. 


Canon  XXIX 
Of  not  kneeling  in  prayer. 

Canon  XXX 

Of  giving  [only]  names  of  Christians  in 
baptism,  and  of  heretics  who  retain  the  faith 
in  the  Trinity  and  the  perfect  form  of  bap- 
tism ;  and  of  others  not  retaining  it,  worthy 
of  a  worse  name,  and  of  how  such  are  to  be 
received  when  they  come  to  the  faith, 

Canon  XXXI. 
Of  the  system  and  manner  of  receiving  con- 
verts to  the  Orthodox  faith  from  the  heresy 
of  Arius  and  of  other  like. 

Canon  XXXII. 
Of  the  system  of  receiving  those  who  have 
kept  the  dogmas  of  the  faith  and  the  Church's 
laws,  and   yet   have   separated  from  us   and 
afterwards  come  back. 

Canon  XXXIII. 
Of  the  place  of  residence  of  the  Patriarch, 
and  of  the  honour  which  should  be  given  to 
the  bishop  of  Jerusalem  and  to  the  bishop  of 
Seleucia. 

Canon  XXXIV. 

Of  the  honour  to  be  given  to  the  Archbishop 
of  Seleucia  in  the  Synod  of  Greece. 

Canon  XXXV. 
Of  not  holding  a  provincial  synod  in  the 
province  of  Persia  without  the  authority  of 
the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  and  how  the  bishops 
of  Persia  are  subject  to  the  metropolitans  of 
Antioch. 

Canon  XXXVI. 

Of  the  creation  of  a  patriarch  for  Ethiopia, 
and  of  his  power,  and  of  the  honour  to  be  paid 
him  in  the  Synod  of  Greece. 

Canon  XXXVII. 
Of  the  election  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cyprus, 
who  is  subject  to  the  patriarch  of  Antioch. 

Canon  XXXVIII. 
That   the   ordination   of   ministers  of   the 
Church  by  bishops  in  the  dioceses  of  stran- 
gers is  forbidden. 


48 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


Canon  XXXIX. 

Of  the  care  and  power  which  a  Patriarch 
has  over  the  bishops  and  archbishops  of  his 
patriarchate  ;  and  of  the  primacy  of  the  Bishop 
of  Rome  over  all. 

Let  the  patriarch  consider  what  things  are 
done  by  the  archbishops  and  bishops  in  their 
provinces  ;  and  if  he  shall  find  anything  done 
by  them  otherwise  than  it  should  be,  let  him 
change  it,  and  order  it,  as  seemeth  lain  fit ; 
for  he  is  the  father  of  all,  and  they  are  his 
sons.  And  although  the  archbishop  be  among 
the  bishops  as  an  elder  brother,  who  bath  the 
care  of  his  brethren,  and  to  whom  they  owe 
obedience  because  he  is  over  them  ;  yet  the 
patriarch  is  to  all  those  who  are  under  his 
power,  just  as  he  who  holds  the  seat  of  Rome, 
is  the  head  and  prince  of  all  patriarchs  ;  in- 
asmuch as  he  is  first,  as  was  Peter,  to  whom 
power  is  given  over  all  Christian  princes,  and 
over  all  their  peoples,  as  he  who  is  the  Vicar 
of  Christ  our  Lord  over  all  peoples  and  over 
the  whole  Christian  Church,  ami  whoever  shall 
contradict  this,  is  excommunicated  by  the 
Synod.1 

[I  add  Canon  XXXVII.  of  Echellensis's 
Nova  Versio  LXXXIV.  Arabic.  Canonum  Cone. 
Nicceni,  that  the  reader  may  compare  it  with 
the  foregoing.] 

Let  there  be  only  four  patriarchs  in  the 
whole  world  as  there  are  four  writers  of  the 
Gospel,  and  four  rivez*s,  etc.  And  let  there  : 
be  a  prince  and  chief  over  them,  the  lord  of 
the  see  of  the  Divine  Peter  at  Rome,  accord- 
ing as  the  Apostles  commanded.  And  after 
him  the  lord  of  the  great  Alexandria,  which 
is  the  see  of  Mark.  And  the  third  is  the  lord 
of  Ephesus,  which  is  the  see  of  John  the 
Divine  who  speaks  divine  things.  And  the 
fourth  and  last  is  my  lord  of  Antioch,  which 
is  another  see  of  Peter.  And  let  all  the  bish- 
ops.be  divided  under  the  hands  of  these  four  \ 
patriarchs  ;  and  the  bishops  of  the  little  towns 
which  are  under  the  dominion  of  the  great  > 
cities  let  them  be  under  the  authority  of  these 
metropolitans.  But  let  every  metropolitan 
of  these  great  cities  appoint  the  bishops  of 
his  province,  but  let  none  of  the  bishops  ap- 
point him,  for  he  is  greater  than  they.  There- 
fore let  every  man  know  his  own  rank,  and 
1>  t  him  not  usurp  the  rank  of  another.  And 
whosoever  shall  contradict  this  law  which  we 
have  established  the  Fathers  of  the  Synod 
subject  him  to  anathema.2 


1 1  have  translated  the  whole  canon  literally ;  the  reader  will 
jndsre  of  it?  antiquity. 

2  Canon  XXXIX.  of  this  series  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Pa- 
triarchs or  with  the  see  of  Rome  and  its  prerogatives. 


Canon  XL. 

Of  the  provincial  synod  which  should  be 
held  twice  every  year,  and  of  its  utility  ;  to- 
gether with  the  excommunication  of  such  as 
oppose  the  decree. 

Canon  XLI. 

Of  the  synod  of  Archbishops,  which  meets 
once  a  year  with  the  Patriarch,  and  of  its 
utility ;  also  of  the  collection  to  be  made  for 
the  support  of  the  patriarch  throughout  the 
provinces  and  places  subject  to  the  patriarch. 

Canon  XLII. 
Of  a  cleric  or  monk  who  when  fallen  into 
sin,  and  summoned  once,  twice,  and  thrice, 
does  not  present  himself  for  trial. 

Canon  XLIII. 

What  the  patriarch  should  do  in  the  case 
of  a  defendant  set  at  liberty  unpunished  by 
the  decision  of  the  bishop,  presbyter,  or  even 
of  a  deacon,  as  the  case  may  be. 

Canon  XLIV. 

How  an  archbishop  ought  to  give  trial  to 
one  of  his  suffragan  bishops. 

Canon  XLV. 

Of  the  receiving  of  complaints  and  con- 
demnation of  an  archbishop  against  his  pa- 
triarch. 

Canon  XLVI. 

How  a  patriarch  should  admit  a  complaint 
or  judgment  of  an  Archbishop  against  an 
Archbishop. 

Canon  XLVII. 

Of  those  excommunicated  by  a  certain  one, 
when  they  can  be  and  when  they  cannot  be 
absolved  by  another. 

Canon  XLVIII. 
No  bishop  shall  choose  his  own  successor. 

Canon  XLIX. 
No  simoniacal  ordinations  shall  be  made. 

Canon  L. 

There  shall  be  but  one  bishop  of  one  city, 
and  one  parochus  of  one  town  ;  also  the  in- 
cumbent, whether  bishop  or  parish  priest, 
shall  not  be  removed  in  favour  of  a  successor 
desired  by  some  of  the  people  unless  he  has 
been  convicted  of  manifest  crime. 

Canon  LI. 
Bishops  shall  not  allow  the  separation  of  a 
wife  from  her  husband  on  account  of  discord 
— [in   American,     "incompatibility    of    tern- 
per"]. 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


49 


Canon  LII. 
Usury  and  the  base  seeking  of  worldly  gain 
is  forbidden  to  the  clergy,  also  conversation 
and  fellowship  with  Jews. 

Canon  LIII. 
Marriages  with  infidels  to  be  avoided. 

Canon  LIV. 

Of  the  election  of  a  chorepiscopus,  and  of 
his  duties  in  towns,  and  villages,  and  monas- 
teries. 

Canon  LV. 

How  a  chorepiscopus  should  visit  the 
churches  and  monasteries  which  are  under 
his  jurisdiction. 

Canon  LVI. 

Of  how  the  presbyters  of  the  towns  and  vil- 
lages should  go  twice  a  year  with  their  chor- 
episcopus to  salute  the  bishop,  and  how  re- 
ligious should  do  so  once  a  year  from  their 
monasteries,  and  how  the  new  abbot  of  a 
monastery'  should  go  thrice. 

Canon  LVII. 

Of  the  rank  in  sitting  during  the  celebra- 
tion of  service  in  church  by  the  bishop,  the 
archdeacon  and  the  chorepiscopus  ;  and  of 
the  office  of  archdeacon,  and  of  the  honour 
due  the  archpresbyter. 

Canon  LVIII. 
Of  the  honour  due  the  archdeacon  and  the 
chorepiscopus  when  they  sit  in  church  during 
the  absence  of  the  bishop,  and  when  they  go 
about  with  the  bishop. 

Canon  LIX. 
How  all  the  grades  of  the  clergy  and  their 
duties  should  be  publicly  described  and  set 
forth. 

Canon  LX. 

Of  how  men  are  to  be  chosen  from  the  dio- 
cese for  holy  orders,  and  of  how  they  should 
be  examined. 

Canon  LXI. 

Of  the  honour  due  to  the  deacons,  and  how 
the  clerics  must  not  put  themselves  in  their 
way. 

Canon  LXII. 

The  number  of  presbyters  and  deacons  is 
to  be  adapted  to  the  work  of  the  church  and 
to  its  means. 

Canon  LXIIL 
Of  the  Ecclesiastical  Economist  and  of  the 
others  who  with  him  care  for  the  church's 
possessions. 

vol.  xiv.  E 


Canon  LXIV. 
Of  the  offices  said  in  the  church,  the  night 
and  day  offices,  and  of  the  collect  for  all  those 
who  rule  that  church. 

Canon  LXV. 

Of  the  order  to  be  observed  at  the  funeral 
of  a  bishop,  of  a  chorepiscopus  and  of  an  arch- 
deacon, and  of  the  office  of  exequies. 

Canon  LXVI. 

Of  taking  a  second  wife,  after  the  former 
one  has  been  disowned  for  any  cause,  or  even 
not  put  away,  and  of  him  who  falsely  accuses 
his  wife  of  adultery. 

If  any  priest  or  deacon  shall  put  away  his 
wife  on  account  of  her  fornication,  or  for  other 
cause,  as  aforesaid,  or  cast  her  out  of  doors 
for  external  good,  or  that  he  may  change  her 
for  another  more  beautiful,  or  better,  or  richer, 
or  does  so  out  of  his  lust  which  is  displeasing 
to  God  ;  and  after  she  has  been  put  away  for 
any  of  these  causes  he  shall  contract  matri- 
mony with  another,  or  without  having  put 
her  away  shall  take  another,  whether  free  or 
bond  ;  and  shall  have  both  equally,  they  living 
separately  and  he  sleeping  every  night  with 
one  or  other  of  them,  or  else  keeping  both  in 
the  same  house  and  bed,  let  him  be  deposed. 
If  he  were  a  layman  let  him  be  deprived  of 
communion.  But  if  anyone  falsely  defames 
hi«  wife  charging  her  with  adultery,  so  that 
he  turns  her  out  of  doors,  the  matter  must 
be  diligently  examined ;  and  if  the  accusation 
was  false,  he  shall  be  deposed  if  a  cleric,  but 
if  a  layman  shall  be  prohibited  from  entering 
the  church  and  from  the  communion  of  the 
faithful ;  and  shall  be  compelled  to  live  with 
her  whom  he  has  defamed,  even  though  she 
be  deformed,  and  poor,  and  insane  ;  and  who- 
ever shall  not  obey  is  excommunicated  by 
the  Synod. 

[Note. — The  reader  will  notice  that  by  this 
canon  a  husband  is  deposed  or  excommuni- 
cated, as  the  case  may  be,  if  he  marry  another 
woman,  after  putting  away  his  wife  on  ac- 
count of  her  adultery.  It  is  curious  that  in 
the  parallel  canon  in  the  collection  of  Echel- 
leusis,  which  is  numbered  LXXL,  the  reading 
is  quite  different,  although  it  is  very  awkward 
and  inconsequent  as  given.  Moreover,  it 
should  be  remembered  that  in  some  codices 
and  editions  this  canon  is  lacking  altogether, 
one  on  the  right  of  the  Pope  to  receive  ap- 
peals taking  its  place.  As  this  canon  is  of 
considerable  length,  I  only  quote  the  inter- 
esting parts.] 

Whatever  presbyter  or  deacon  shall  put 
away  his  wife  without  the  offence  of  fornica- 


50 


I.  NICE.     A.D.  325 


tion,  or  for  any  other  cause  of  which  we  have 
spoken  above,  and  shall  cast  her  out  of  doors 
.  .  .  such  a  person  shall  be  cast  out  of  the 
clergy,  if  he  were  a  clergyman ;  if  a  laj'man 
he  shall  be  forbidden  the  communion  of  the 
faithful.  .  .  .  But  if  that  woman  [untruly 
charged  by  her  husband  with  adultery],  that 
is  to  say  his  wife,  spurns  his  society  on  ac- 
count of  the  injury  he  has  done  her  and  the 
charge  he  has  brought  against  her,  of  which 
she  is  innocent,  let  her  freely  be  put  away 
and  let  a  bill  of  repudiation  be  written  for 
her,  noting  the  false  accusation  which  had 
been  brought  against  her.  And  then  if  she 
should  wish  to  marry  some  other  faithful 
man,  it  is  right  for  her  to  do  so,  nor  does  the 
Church  forbid  it;  and  the  same  permission 
extends  as  well  to  men  as  to  women,  since 
there  is  equal  reason  for  it  for  each.  But  if 
he  shall  return  to  better  fruit  which  is  of  the 
same  kind,  and  shall  conciliate  to  himself  the 
love  and  benevolence  of  his  consort,  and  shall 
be  willing  to  return  to  his  pristine  friendship, 
his  fault  shall  be  condoned  to  him  after  he 
has  done  suitable  and  sufficient  penance. 
And  whoever  shall  speak  against  this  decree 
the  fathers  of  the  synod  excommunicate  him. 

Canon  LXVII. 

Of  having  two  wives  at  the  same  time,  and 
of  a  woman  who  is  one  of  the  faithful  marry- 
ing an  infidel ;  and  of  the  form  of  receiving 
her  to  penance. 

[Her  reception  back  is  conditioned  upon 
her  leaving  the  infidel  man.] 

Canon  LXVIII. 

Of  giving  in  marriage  to  an  infidel  a 
daughter  or  sister  without  her  knowledge 
and  contrary  to  her  wish. 

Canon  LXIX. 

Of  one  of  the  faithful  who  departs  from  the 
faith  through  lust  and  love  of  an  infidel ;  and 
of  the  form  of  receiving  him  back,  or  admit- 
ting him  to  penance. 

Canon  LXX. 

Of  the  hospital  to  be  established  in  every 
city,  and  of  the  choice  of  a  superintendent 
and  concerning  his  duties. 

[It  is  interesting  to  note  that  one  of  the 
duties  of  the  superintendent  is — "  That  if  the 
goods  of  the  hospital  are  not  sufficient  for  its 
expenses,  he  ought  to  collect  all  the  time  and 
from  all  Christians  provision  according  to 
the  ability  of  each."] 

Canon  LXXI. 

Of  the  placing  a  bishop  or  archbishop  in  his 
chair  after  ordination,  which  is  enthronization. 


Canon  LXXII. 

No  one  is  allowed  to  transfer  himself  to 
another  church  [i.e.,  diocese]  than  that  in 
which  he  was  ordained  ;  and  what  is  to  be 
done  in  the  case  of  one  cast  out  forcibly  with- 
out any  blame  attaching  to  him. 

Canon  LXXIII. 

The  laity  shall  not  choose  for  themselves 
priests  in  the  towns  and  villages  without  the 
authority  of  the  chorepiscopus  ;  nor  an  abbot 
for  a  monastery  ;  and  that  no  one  should  give 
commands  as  to  who  should  be  elected  his 
successor  after  his  death,  and  when  this  is 
lawful  for  a  superior. 

Canon  LXXIV. 
How  sisters,  widows,  and  deaconesses 
should  be  made  to  keep  their  residence  in 
their  monasteries  ;  and  of  the  system  of  in- 
structing them  ;  and  of  the  election  of  dea- 
conesses, and  of  their  duties  and  utility. 

Canon  LXXV. 
How  one  seeking  election  should  not  be 
chosen,  even  if  of  conspicuous  virtue  ;  and 
how  the  election  of  a  layman  to  the  aforesaid 
grades  is  not  prohibited,  and  that  those  chosen 
should  not  afterward  be  deprived  before  their 
deaths,  except  on  account  of  crime. 

Canon  LXXVI. 
Of   the   distinctive   garb    and    distinctive 
names  and  conversation  of  monks  and  nuns. 

Canon  LXXVII. 
That  a  bishop  convicted  of  adultery  or  of 
other  similar  crime  should  be  deposed  with- 
out hope  of  restoration  to  the  same  grade  ; 
but  shall  not  be  excommunicated. 

Canon  LXXVIII. 
Of  presbyters  and  deacons  who  have  fallen 
only  once  into  adultei-y,  if  they  have  never 
been  married ;  and  of  the  same  when  fallen 
as  widowers,  and  those  who  have  fallen,  all 
the  while  having  their  own  wives.  Also  of 
those  who  return  to  the  same  sin  as  well  wid- 
owers as  those  having  living  wives  ;  and  which 
of  these  ought  not  to  be  received  to  penance, 
and  which  once  only,  and  which  twice. 

Canon  LXXIX. 
Each  one  of  the  faithful  while  his  sin  is  yet 
not  public  should  be  mended  by  private  ex- 
hortation and  admonitiou  ;  if  he  will  not  profit 
by  this,  he  must  be  excommunicated. 

Canon  LXXX. 
Of  the  election  of  a  procurator  of  the  poor, 
and  of  his  duties. 
